


A PROJECT REPORT ON
“PREDICTEDU - CLOUD-BASED STUDENT PERFORMANCE
PREDICTION SYSTEM USING MACHINE LEARNING”
A detailed study done in
“CLOUD COMPUTING & DATA SCIENCE”
Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the award of degree of
MASTER OF COMPUTER APPLICATIONS (MCA)
under
Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Pune
Submitted by
Mr. CHINMAY ABHIJEET KOSHE
PRN: 2528100264
BATCH: 2024-2026
Under the esteemed guidance of
Dr. SHAMBHU RAI




DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER APPLICATIONS
Bharati Vidyapeeth’s Institute of Management & Entrepreneurship Development
Navi Mumbai
2024 – 2026
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The successful completion of this project would not have been possible without the guidance, support, and encouragement of many individuals to whom I express my sincere gratitude.

First and foremost, I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my project guide, Dr. Shambhu Rai, for his invaluable guidance, continuous encouragement, constructive suggestions, and technical expertise throughout the development of this project. His support and insightful feedback greatly contributed to the successful completion of this work.

I extend my sincere thanks to the Director, faculty members, and staff of the Department of Computer Applications, Bharati Vidyapeeth's Institute of Management & Entrepreneurship Development, Navi Mumbai, for providing an excellent academic environment, necessary infrastructure, and constant motivation during the course of this project.

I also acknowledge the valuable support provided by the open-source community and the official documentation of React, Node.js, Express.js, MongoDB, Flask, and Scikit-learn, which served as important learning resources during the design and implementation of this application.

My sincere appreciation goes to my classmates and friends for their valuable suggestions, constructive feedback, and encouragement throughout the project development process.

Finally, I express my deepest gratitude to my parents and family members for their unconditional support, patience, and constant motivation throughout my academic journey. Their encouragement inspired me to complete this project with dedication and confidence.

I also thank Bharati Vidyapeeth (Deemed to be University), Pune, for providing the opportunity to undertake this project as a part of the Master of Computer Applications (MCA) curriculum, enabling me to enhance my technical knowledge and practical skills.


Mr. Chinmay Abhijeet Koshe
 
 PLEASE PASTE HERE THE CERTIFICATE FROM THE COMPANY





























 PLEASE PASTE HERE THE CERTIFICATE FROM THE INSTITUTE





























 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This project, titled "PredictEdu - Cloud-Based Student Performance Prediction System Using Machine Learning," presents a cloud-based intelligent platform designed to assist institutions, faculty, and students in monitoring academic performance and predicting pass/fail risk from measurable academic indicators. The system leverages modern web technologies and Artificial Intelligence to provide academic performance predictions, risk alerts, and actionable improvement suggestions.

The application is developed using React.js for the frontend, Node.js and Express.js for the backend, and MongoDB Atlas as the cloud database. User authentication is implemented using JWT and Google OAuth, while a Flask-based Random Forest machine-learning API is integrated to generate prediction results, with a local rule-based fallback when the ML service is unavailable. The project follows a modular and scalable architecture, ensuring maintainability, security, and ease of future enhancements.

The primary objective of this system is to bridge the gap between raw academic records and timely intervention by providing data-driven performance insights and practical recommendations. The platform enables users to view their academic profile, track attendance and marks, understand predicted outcomes, follow roadmap milestones, and receive suggestions for improving academic performance.

The project demonstrates the practical application of Cloud Computing, Data Science, Machine Learning, and Full-Stack Web Development in solving a real-world problem. It also emphasizes secure application development, responsive user interface design, cloud deployment, and efficient database management. The proposed solution can be further enhanced by incorporating larger institutional datasets, improved predictive models, LMS integration, parent/faculty communication workflows, and advanced machine learning techniques.

Overall, this project provides a comprehensive, scalable, and user-friendly academic performance prediction solution while enabling the practical implementation of concepts learned during the Master of Computer Applications (MCA) programme.





 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Sr. No.	Particulars	Page No.
—	Acknowledgement	i
—	Certificate	ii
—	Declaration	iii
—	Executive Summary	iv
—	Table of Contents	v
—	List of Figures	vi
—	List of Tables	vii
—	List of Abbreviations	viii
1	CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION OF THE PROJECT	1
1.1	Concept & Significance of the Study	2
1.2	Objective of the Study	6
1.3	Scope and Limitations	10
1.4	Literature Review	14
2	CHAPTER 2: INTRODUCTION TO INDUSTRY & COMPANY	28
2.1	Overview of EdTech, Academic Analytics & ML Industry	29
2.2	Growth & Trends in Academic Prediction Tools	33
2.3	Technology Evolution in Academic Monitoring	37
2.4	Introduction to the Company / Development Environment	41
2.5	Host System Architecture (MERN Stack Platform)	45
2.6	Third-party Cloud and ML Services	49
2.7	Industrial and Organizational Context	53
3	CHAPTER 3: RESEARCH METHODOLOGY & SYSTEM DESIGN	57
3.1	Research Design & System Architecture	58
3.2	Data Collection Techniques and Tools (Academic Metrics & Profile Ingestion)	64
3.3	Sample Design & Database Schema Reference	68
3.4	Hardware and Software Requirements	75
3.5	Requirement Traceability Matrix & Feasibility Study	78
4	CHAPTER 4: DATA ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION & IMPLEMENTATION	84
4.1	Implementation Flow & REST API Surfaces	85
4.2	Data Interpretation Algorithms (ML Scoring and Aggregate Distributions)	95
4.3	Academic Report Generation and Prediction Evaluation Results	103
4.4	Testing & E2E Validation Results (Unit, System, Load Checks)	112
4.5	Bug Resolution Log Analysis	124
5	CHAPTER 5: CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS	131
5.1	Summary of Project Achievements	132
5.2	Limitations & Engineering Reflections	137
5.3	Future Scope & Advanced Enhancements	142
5.4	Industrial Applications & Social Impact	148
A	ANNEXURE	153
A.1	User Manual & Setup Guide	154
A.2	API Reference	160
A.3	Glossaries & Test Profiles	166
—	BIBLIOGRAPHY	172

 LIST OF FIGURES

Figure No.	Figure Title	Page No.
Figure 1.1	Gantt Chart – MCA Project Development Schedule	25
Figure 1.2	PERT Chart – Project Network Diagram	26
Figure 3.1	High-Level System Architecture	60
Figure 3.2	Entity-Relationship Diagram – MongoDB Document Model	62
Figure 3.3	Data Flow Diagram – Level 0 (Context Diagram)	64
Figure 3.4	Data Flow Diagram – Level 1	66
Figure 3.5	Use Case Diagram	68
Figure 3.6	UML Class Diagram	70
Figure 3.7	Sequence Diagram – ML Prediction Flow	72
Figure 3.8	Activity Diagram – Student Performance Prediction Workflow	74
Figure 3.9	Component Diagram – Modular Decomposition	76
Figure 3.10	Deployment Diagram – Physical Topology	78
Figure 4.1	Home / Landing Page	88
Figure 4.2	Student Dashboard	91
Figure 4.3	Prediction Results Page	95
Figure 4.4	Improvement Roadmap Tracker	99
Figure 4.5	Admin Analytics Dashboard	104
Figure 4.6	Mobile Responsive View – Student Dashboard	109
 LIST OF TABLES
Table No.	Table Title	Page No.
Table 1.1	Comparative Feature Analysis of Existing Student Performance Prediction Platforms	27
Table 3.1	Functional Requirements Specification	80
Table 3.2	Non-Functional Requirements Specification	82
Table 3.3	Users Collection Schema	84
Table 3.4	Students Collection Schema	86
Table 3.5	SkillAssessments Collection Schema	88
Table 3.6	Faculties Collection Schema	90
Table 3.7	Hardware Requirements (Development & End-User)	92
Table 3.8	Software Requirements	94
Table 3.9	Requirement Traceability Matrix	97
Table 3.10	Risk Register	100
Table 4.1	REST API Endpoint Summary	114
Table 4.2	Representative Unit Test Cases	117
Table 4.3	Integration Test Scenarios	119
Table 4.4	System Test Cases	122
Table 4.5	Performance Testing Results	125
Table 4.6	Significant Bug Reports and Resolutions	128
Table A.1	Required Environment Variables (server/.env)	156
Table A.2	Common Issues and Resolutions	161
 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Abbreviation	Full Form
AI	Artificial Intelligence
API	Application Programming Interface
APR	Academic Performance Report
CDN	Content Delivery Network
CGPA	Cumulative Grade Point Average
CORS	Cross-Origin Resource Sharing
CRUD	Create, Read, Update, Delete
DFD	Data Flow Diagram
DOM	Document Object Model
ERD	Entity Relationship Diagram
GDPR	General Data Protection Regulation
HTTP/HTTPS	Hypertext Transfer Protocol (Secure)
IDE	Integrated Development Environment
JSON	JavaScript Object Notation
JWT	JSON Web Token
ML	Machine Learning
MERN	MongoDB, Express.js, React.js, Node.js
MCA	Master of Computer Applications
NoSQL	Not Only Structured Query Language
OAuth	Open Authorization
ODM	Object Document Mapper
PERT	Program Evaluation and Review Technique
REST	Representational State Transfer
RBAC	Role-Based Access Control
SPA	Single Page Application
SRS	Software Requirement Specification
SSL/TLS	Secure Sockets Layer / Transport Layer Security
SWOT	Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats
UI/UX	User Interface / User Experience

 Chapter 1: Introduction of the Project
1.1: Concept & Significance of the Study
Every year, higher-education institutions maintain large volumes of academic data such as attendance, assignment marks, internal test scores, CGPA, study hours, and backlog records. In many colleges this data is stored, reviewed, and acted upon after delays, which makes it difficult to identify at-risk students early enough for meaningful academic intervention. PredictEdu addresses this gap by converting routine student records into timely pass/fail risk predictions and actionable improvement suggestions.

The rise of cloud computing and machine learning has made this type of academic monitoring practical for institutions of different sizes. A trained Random Forest classifier can process structured student metrics quickly, while a MERN-based web platform can present the result through dashboards for administrators, faculty mentors, and students. This is the central concept on which PredictEdu - Cloud-Based Student Performance Prediction System Using Machine Learning has been designed and built.

The project sits at the intersection of three broader technology trends that have matured considerably over the past few years:

The consolidation of the MERN stack (MongoDB, Express.js, React.js, Node.js) as a default, well-documented choice for building full-stack JavaScript applications without the overhead of context-switching between multiple languages. This allows the backend API services and frontend user interfaces to exchange structured JSON payloads seamlessly, optimizing development speed and maintaining schema-less data consistency.

The democratization of managed cloud infrastructure, where platforms such as MongoDB Atlas, Vercel, and Render now allow developers to deploy globally distributed applications without provisioning physical servers. This enables single-developer teams to construct high-availability applications that auto-deploy on git changes.

The availability of lightweight ML microservices, specifically a Python Flask API serving a Scikit-learn Random Forest model, allows the application to separate prediction logic from the main Express backend while still returning structured results to the dashboard.

Significance and Need of the Project

The need for a system of this kind becomes evident when considering the scale mismatch between the number of students whose performance must be monitored and the limited time available to faculty mentors. Manual review of every attendance sheet, internal mark entry, backlog count, and CGPA trend is time-consuming and vulnerable to late action.

Students and faculty currently need a continuously available, explainable source of academic performance guidance that updates whenever key metrics change. This overarching problem is decomposed into four specific sub-problems that this system resolves:

Lack of Persistent Performance Tracking: The absence of a structured, digital record that combines attendance, assignments, internal marks, CGPA, study hours, backlogs, prediction status, faculty assignment, and improvement milestones in one place.

Delayed Risk Identification: The lack of a mechanism to translate raw academic metrics into timely pass/fail risk predictions with confidence values and suggestions.

Absence of Actionable Improvement Plans: The disconnect between identifying an at-risk student and giving that student a concrete, milestone-based improvement checklist.

Fragmented Academic Reporting: The separation of prediction results from practical institutional tools such as report cards, spreadsheet exports, alerts, and audit logs.

This project was undertaken not merely as an academic exercise in combining technologies, but as a practical attempt to demonstrate how machine learning can support early academic intervention. The system complements faculty mentors by handling high-volume data processing, alerts, reports, and dashboard visualization so that educators can focus on direct guidance.
 1.2: Objective of the Study

The overarching objective of this project is to design, develop, and validate a cloud-ready, machine-learning-assisted web platform that provides Indian MCA and undergraduate computer-science students with continuous academic performance monitoring and early risk prediction.

To achieve this overarching goal, the study is broken down into the following specific, measurable objectives:

Database Architecture: To design a flexible MongoDB schema capable of representing student identity, academic metrics, prediction history, faculty assignment, assessment history, audit data, and improvement milestones in a way that supports efficient querying and future extensibility.

Secure Authentication: To build a secure authentication subsystem supporting both traditional email/password login (hashed using bcrypt and managed via JSON Web Tokens) and Google OAuth 2.0 for low-friction onboarding.

ML Integration & Feature Validation: To prepare validated academic feature inputs and send them to the Flask Random Forest prediction API, while retaining a local rule-based fallback for service-unavailable cases.

Frontend Visualization: To implement a responsive React.js frontend, styled with Tailwind CSS, that visualizes attendance, marks, CGPA, prediction confidence, roadmap progress, and class-level analytics through dashboards and charts.

Automated Academic Report Generation: To implement reporting modules capable of generating PDF report cards and Excel exports populated directly from the student's stored academic metrics, prediction result, confidence score, and suggestions.

Administrative Oversight: To implement a role-based administrative console allowing institutional staff to manage student records, assign faculty, review flagged records, configure warning thresholds, and audit system activity.

Deployment & Validation: To run the completed system as a multi-service application with React, Express, MongoDB, and Flask ML layers, and to validate behaviour under realistic concurrent load through structured testing.
 1.3: Scope and Limitations

Scope of the System

The scope of the system spans a comprehensive suite of functional areas designed to take a student from initial record creation to prediction, alerting, reporting, and improvement tracking. The implemented features include:

User Management: Student registration and authentication via email/password (JWT-based sessions) and Google OAuth 2.0.

Profile Management: Structured profile creation capturing roll number, department, semester, attendance, assignment marks, internal marks, previous CGPA, daily study hours, backlog count, and assigned faculty.

Academic Assessment and Monitoring Engine: Academic metric tracking covering attendance, assignment marks, internal marks, previous CGPA, daily study hours, backlogs, and optional skill-assessment records with instant score reporting.

ML Prediction Engine: Random Forest based pass/fail predictions featuring confidence values and improvement suggestions, produced through the Flask ML API with a rule-based backend fallback.

Actionable Improvement Roadmaps: Milestone-based academic improvement checklists tied to student performance records, complete with progress tracking features.

Academic Reporting Tools: Integrated Excel exports, PDF report-card generation, and student-facing performance summaries based on stored metrics and predictions.

Institutional Controls: An administrative console for student management, faculty assignment, threshold configuration, flagged-record review, and audit-log tracking.

Cross-Platform Accessibility: A fully responsive web design supporting desktop, tablet, and mobile viewports.

(Note: Live one-on-one video mentoring, direct LMS imports, parent mobile applications, advanced deep-learning models, and native iOS/Android applications are explicitly outside the scope of this project and remain areas for future enhancement.)

Limitations of the Study

No system of this scope can be presented without an honest accounting of its limitations. The platform's constraints include:

Reliance on Input Data Quality: The prediction is only as reliable as the academic values entered into the system. Incorrect attendance, marks, CGPA, study-hour, or backlog data can lead to misleading predictions and suggestions.

ML Service Dependency: The Express backend depends on the Flask prediction service for model inference. If the service is unreachable, the backend falls back to local rule-based prediction, but model-quality improvements require retraining and redeployment of the ML service.

Prediction Uncertainty: Even with a trained classifier, predictions are probabilistic and depend on the quality of input features. Faculty review remains necessary before taking high-stakes academic action.

Testing Scale: The current implementation has been tested primarily against synthetic and small-scale real student data. While load-testing results are positive, the system has yet to be validated against the concurrent stress of an entire university's student population in a live academic cycle.

 1.4: Literature Review

 
Figure 1.1: Gantt Chart - MCA Project Development Schedule

 

Figure 1.2: PERT Chart - Project Network Diagram

 Platform / System	Core Purpose	Prediction Method	Dashboard Support	Reporting Support	Limitations	Relevance to PredictEdu
Google Classroom	Course and assignment management	No predictive analytics	✓ Student & Teacher Dashboard	✓ Assignment & Grade Reports	Does not predict student performance or provide ML-based insights	Used as a reference for academic data management
Moodle LMS	Learning Management System	Rule-based analytics and plugins	✓ Comprehensive Dashboard	✓ Gradebook & Progress Reports	Requires third-party plugins for advanced prediction	Demonstrates integration of learning analytics
Microsoft Teams for Education	Online learning and collaboration	Basic activity analytics	✓ Classroom Dashboard	✓ Attendance & Activity Reports	Limited academic performance prediction capabilities	Shows collaboration and communication features
Blackboard Learn	Enterprise Learning Management	Learning analytics	✓ Instructor Dashboard	✓ Student Progress Reports	Proprietary platform with high licensing cost	Reference for institutional analytics features
Canvas LMS	Course delivery and assessment	Built-in analytics	✓ Analytics Dashboard	✓ Performance Reports	No integrated machine learning prediction	Inspiration for user-friendly dashboards
Research Systems (Random Forest, Decision Tree, SVM)	Academic performance prediction	Machine Learning Algorithms	✗ Minimal or Research-only	✗ Limited Reporting	Mostly research prototypes without complete web platforms	Forms the ML foundation of PredictEdu
PredictEdu (Proposed System)	Cloud-based student performance prediction and monitoring	Random Forest + Rule-based Fallback	✓ Admin, Faculty & Student Dashboards	✓ PDF Reports, Excel Export, Prediction Reports	Prototype currently evaluated on limited datasets	Combines ML prediction, cloud deployment, dashboards, reporting, alerts, and improvement roadmap in one platform


Table 1.1: Comparative Feature Analysis of Existing Student Performance Prediction Platforms

The application of technology to student performance monitoring has evolved significantly over the past two decades. Early academic information systems focused mainly on storing marks and attendance after examinations. Although useful for record keeping, such systems rarely predicted risk in advance or provided actionable recommendations before final results were declared.

Educational data mining and machine learning introduced a more proactive approach. Researchers have shown that classifiers such as Random Forest, Decision Tree, Support Vector Machine, and Logistic Regression can estimate academic risk using variables such as attendance, internal assessment, previous CGPA, assignment scores, study hours, and backlog history. These studies support the feature set used in PredictEdu.

Recent EdTech platforms combine predictive models with full-stack dashboards so that results are visible to administrators, faculty, and students. This makes the prediction operational rather than theoretical: the result can trigger warning emails, appear in analytics charts, guide faculty intervention, and be included in PDF or Excel reports.

A common limitation in academic analytics systems is the gap between model output and institutional workflow. A prediction alone is not enough; staff need role-based access, audit logs, import/export tools, threshold settings, and clear student-level explanations.

This project addresses that gap by combining the MERN stack with a Flask-based Random Forest ML service. It builds on educational data mining concepts while adding practical modules for authentication, faculty assignment, analytics dashboards, alerts, report generation, and improvement milestones.

Chapter 2: Introduction to Industry & Company
2.1: Overview of EdTech, Academic Analytics & ML Industry

The education technology industry has moved far beyond simple digitization of classrooms. In the early stage of EdTech adoption, most systems were limited to uploading lecture notes, maintaining attendance registers, conducting online examinations, or sharing notices through institutional portals. These tools improved convenience, but they did not actively support decision-making. Modern educational institutions now require systems that can interpret academic data, identify risk patterns, and help faculty take preventive action before a student reaches failure stage.
Academic analytics is one of the most important branches of this transformation. It focuses on collecting, organizing, and interpreting student-related data such as attendance percentage, assignment performance, internal examination marks, previous CGPA, study hours, backlog count, and semester progress. When these indicators are viewed together, they reveal early signs of academic decline that may not be visible from a single mark sheet. For example, a student with acceptable CGPA but poor attendance may become vulnerable in the next examination cycle, while a student with high attendance but low internal marks may require focused subject mentoring.
Machine Learning adds predictive capability to academic analytics. Instead of depending only on manual judgement, ML models can learn from historical or synthetic academic records and estimate whether a student is likely to pass or fail. In PredictEdu, this role is handled through a Random Forest classifier served by a Flask API. The model uses academic indicators as input features and returns a prediction result, confidence score, and improvement suggestions. This makes the system useful not only as a record-management tool but also as an early-warning and academic-support platform.
The relevance of this industry is especially high in Indian higher education, where faculty members often handle large batches and administrative responsibilities at the same time. In such an environment, an automated prediction dashboard can help institutions prioritize intervention, track students more consistently, and produce reports quickly for academic review meetings.

2.2: Growth & Trends in Academic Prediction Tools

The growth of academic prediction tools is driven by the need for timely, scalable, and evidence-based student support. Traditional academic monitoring usually happens after internal tests or final examinations, when the opportunity for early correction may already be reduced. Predictive systems shift the focus from post-result analysis to continuous monitoring. As soon as attendance, assignment marks, internal marks, CGPA, study hours, or backlog details are updated, the system can re-evaluate the student profile and display the latest risk status.
A major trend in this area is the use of real-time dashboards. Administrators need a broad overview of student performance across departments, semesters, and risk categories, while faculty members need a focused view of assigned students. Students require a simpler personal dashboard that explains their current standing and gives them practical suggestions. PredictEdu follows this role-based approach by separating admin, faculty, and student interfaces.
Another important trend is automated reporting. Institutions regularly need PDF report cards, spreadsheet exports, analytics summaries, and warning records. Manual report preparation consumes time and can introduce formatting errors. By integrating PDFKit and ExcelJS in the backend, the system can generate academic reports directly from the database, ensuring that prediction results, confidence values, and student metrics remain consistent across dashboards and downloaded files.
Notification and alert mechanisms are also becoming important. Low attendance, low internal marks, repeated backlogs, or failing prediction status require quick communication. PredictEdu supports this idea through threshold-based settings and email notification utilities, allowing academic staff to act before the problem grows.
Overall, academic prediction tools are growing because they combine three practical benefits: faster identification of at-risk students, better visibility for faculty and administrators, and more structured communication with students.
2.3: Technology Evolution in Academic Monitoring
Academic monitoring began with paper-based registers and manually prepared mark sheets. These records were useful for compliance, but searching, comparing, and analyzing them was slow. The next stage introduced spreadsheet-based tracking, where attendance and marks could be stored digitally. Spreadsheets improved calculation and storage, but they still depended heavily on manual updates and did not provide secure role-based access or automated prediction.
The following stage brought web-based Student Information Systems. These platforms allowed institutions to store student profiles, attendance, examination records, and notices in a centralized database. However, many such systems still worked mainly as storage portals. They could show what had happened, but they could not reliably predict what might happen next.
Machine Learning changed this direction by enabling predictive academic monitoring. Algorithms such as Decision Tree, Logistic Regression, Support Vector Machine, and Random Forest can classify students based on multiple academic features. Random Forest is particularly suitable for this project because it combines multiple decision trees, handles mixed academic indicators well, reduces overfitting compared to a single tree, and provides stable classification results for pass/fail prediction.
Modern full-stack development has also improved the delivery of such systems. React.js supports interactive dashboards, Express.js provides REST APIs, MongoDB stores flexible student documents, and Flask serves the trained ML model separately. This separation of concerns makes the system easier to maintain: the frontend handles user experience, the backend handles authentication and business rules, the database stores institutional records, and the ML API focuses on prediction.
2.4: Introduction to the Company / Development Environment
This project has been developed in an academic development environment for the Department of Computer Applications at Bharati Vidyapeeth's Institute of Management & Entrepreneurship Development, Navi Mumbai. Since it is an MCA project, the development environment is designed to reflect real-world software engineering practice while remaining affordable, reproducible, and suitable for student-level deployment.
The project environment includes three main service layers. The first layer is the React frontend, which provides landing pages, login screens, dashboards, analytics views, settings pages, report actions, and student performance summaries. The second layer is the Node.js and Express backend, which manages authentication, authorization, student records, faculty records, prediction calls, imports, exports, audit logs, and notifications. The third layer is the Python Flask ML API, which loads the trained Random Forest model and exposes a /predict endpoint.
The development process follows a modular structure. Backend files are organized into routes, controllers, models, middleware, and utilities. Frontend files are organized into pages, components, context, and service helpers. ML resources are separated into dataset generation, model training, and inference API files. This structure makes the project easier to explain, test, and maintain.
The environment also considers practical constraints normally faced in academic projects. The system can run locally using MongoDB, Node.js, React Vite, and Python Flask. It can also be adapted for cloud deployment using services such as Vercel for frontend hosting, Render for backend/API hosting, and MongoDB Atlas for database hosting. This balance between local reproducibility and cloud readiness makes the project suitable for demonstration, evaluation, and future scaling.
2.5: Host System Architecture (MERN Stack Platform)
PredictEdu uses the MERN stack as the core web application platform. MongoDB is used as the database because student performance records contain structured fields as well as nested data such as prediction objects, suggestions, and roadmap milestones. This document-based structure fits naturally with Mongoose schemas and allows future fields to be added without major relational redesign.
Express.js and Node.js form the backend API layer. The backend exposes protected REST routes for authentication, student management, assessment submission, report generation, system settings, and audit logs. JWT-based authentication is used to protect user sessions, while role-based authorization separates Admin, Faculty, and Student permissions. For example, an Admin can create and manage student records, a Faculty user can view and update assigned academic metrics, and a Student can view their own dashboard and download reports.
React.js forms the frontend client layer. It provides a single-page application experience with route-based pages, reusable components, responsive layouts, and chart-based analytics. The student dashboard displays personal academic information, prediction result, confidence score, suggestions, and improvement milestones. Admin and faculty dashboards provide broader record-management and analytics capabilities.
The ML inference layer is intentionally separated from the Express backend. The Flask API receives academic metrics such as Attendance, AssignmentMarks, InternalMarks, CGPA, and StudyHours, then returns the prediction result. If the Flask service is unavailable, the backend contains a rule-based fallback prediction method. This design improves reliability because the system can continue functioning even if the ML service is temporarily offline.
2.6: Third-party Cloud and ML Services
The system is designed to work with both local and cloud-based services. In a local setup, the frontend runs through Vite, the backend runs on Node.js, MongoDB runs locally or through Atlas, and the Flask ML API runs as a separate Python service. In a cloud-ready setup, the frontend can be hosted on Vercel, the backend can be hosted on Render, and MongoDB Atlas can be used as a managed database service.
MongoDB Atlas provides managed database hosting, backups, monitoring, and access control. It is useful for this project because it removes the need to maintain a physical database server and supports secure connection strings through environment variables. Render or a similar platform can host the backend and ML services, while Vercel can serve the compiled React frontend through a global edge network.
The ML service uses Scikit-learn and Joblib. The trained Random Forest model is stored as a model file and loaded by the Flask application during inference. This approach keeps model training and model serving separate. The dataset and training scripts can be improved independently, while the backend continues to consume prediction results through a stable REST interface.
The backend also includes supporting third-party libraries such as Nodemailer for email alerts, PDFKit for PDF report-card generation, ExcelJS for spreadsheet exports, Multer for file uploads, bcrypt for password hashing, and Mongoose for database interaction. Together, these libraries help the project behave like a complete institutional platform rather than a simple prediction demo.
2.7: Industrial and Organizational Context
From an organizational perspective, PredictEdu supports three main stakeholders: administrators, faculty members, and students. Administrators need control over student records, faculty accounts, system thresholds, analytics, and audit logs. Faculty members need quick access to assigned students and the ability to update academic variables. Students need a clear personal view of their academic status and practical suggestions for improvement.
In an institutional setting, this type of platform can support academic review meetings, mentoring sessions, attendance monitoring, and semester-progress evaluation. Instead of relying only on final examination results, the institution can identify risk earlier and create targeted intervention plans. For example, students with low attendance can be guided toward attendance recovery, students with weak internal marks can be advised to attend remedial sessions, and students with high backlog counts can be tracked more closely by faculty mentors.
The same architecture also has industrial relevance beyond colleges. Training departments, learning and development teams, and certification programs often need to monitor learner progress, predict completion risk, and generate performance reports. The modular design of PredictEdu can be adapted to such environments by changing the input features and prediction labels.
The social value of the system lies in improving access to timely academic guidance. In institutions where faculty workload is high, automated analytics can ensure that struggling students are not missed. The system does not replace teachers or mentors; instead, it gives them better evidence, faster reporting, and clearer priorities for intervention.
Chapter 3: Research Methodology & System Design
3.1: Research Design & System Architecture

The research design follows a system-engineering model (Waterfall requirements followed by Agile iteration cycles). The system design features a layered, cloud-native architecture. The client layer manages visual rendering and local component state; the application layer validates requests, routes traffic, and handles business logic; the data layer persists document records in MongoDB Atlas; and the external services layer sends validated academic metrics to the Flask ML prediction API.

Module breakdown:
Authentication Controller: Manages login, registration, password resets, and Google OAuth sessions.
Student Controller: Handles performance metrics, student lists, flagging status, and milestones.
Prediction and Support Controllers: Handle ML prediction flow, optional academic support utilities, report-card generation, and protected API responses.
Assessment Controller: Persists MCQ test data and calculates proficiency scores.

 
Figure 3.1: High-Level System Architecture

 
Figure 3.2: Entity-Relationship Diagram - MongoDB Document Model


Figure 3.3: Data Flow Diagram - Level 0 (Context Diagram)
 

Figure 3.4: Data Flow Diagram - Level 1

 Figure 3.5: Use Case Diagram
 
Figure 3.6: UML Class Diagram
 Figure 3.7: Sequence Diagram - ML Prediction Flow
 Figure 3.8: Activity Diagram - Student Performance Prediction Workflow
 Figure 3.9: Component Diagram - Modular Decomposition
 Figure 3.10: Deployment Diagram - Physical Topology

 3.1.1 Detailed Architectural Schematics and UML Visualizations

The high-level topological flow is mapped via specific figures presented in Chapter 3:
- Figure 3.1: Details client-to-server TLS routing configurations. All static resources are served by Vercel Edge networks; dynamic REST queries map to Render APIs.
- Figure 3.2: Explains document relations in MongoDB. A User document maps one-to-one with a Student document, while Student documents aggregate multiple embedded milestones.
- Figure 3.3 & 3.4: Context DFD Level 0 and Level 1. Shows that prediction starts after a student profile and academic metrics are available.
- Figure 3.5: Represents use-cases. Includes standard student operations (MCQ quiz launch, mock performance review chat, report card download) and admin/faculty control metrics (student flagging, data audits).
- Figure 3.6: Illustrates Class relationships mapping models (`User`, `Student`, `Faculty`, `SkillAssessment`) to controllers.
- Figure 3.7: Sequence diagram tracing ML prediction execution. Runs from frontend or backend trigger to Express validation, MongoDB lookup, Flask prediction request, response handling, and save.
- Figure 3.8: Activity chart mapping the student performance prediction lifecycle.
- Figure 3.9 & 3.10: Component and Deployment architectures outlining PaaS container details.

3.2: Data Collection Techniques and Tools (Academic Metrics & Profile Ingestion)

Data collection incorporates student academic ingestion and interactive academic assessments:
Profile Ingestion: Captures quantitate	ve metrics (department, semester, attendance, cgpa, and backlog counts) via web forms or CSV imports.
Interactive MCQ Assessments: Captures technical scores across 3 domains: Programming Fundamentals, Web Development, and Data Science. The questions test syntax, database queries, and algorithmic complexity.
Proficiency scoring utilizes an O(n) algorithm that calculates the percentage of correct MCQ responses.


Requirement ID	Requirement Description	User Role	Input	Output	Priority
FR-01	User Registration	Student, Admin	Name, Email, Password	New user account created	High
FR-02	User Login & Authentication	Student, Faculty, Admin	Email/Password or Google OAuth	Secure login with JWT session	High
FR-03	Student Profile Management	Student	Academic details (Attendance, CGPA, Marks, Study Hours, Backlogs)	Updated student profile	High
FR-04	Faculty Assignment	Admin	Student ID, Faculty ID	Faculty assigned to student	Medium
FR-05	Student Performance Prediction	Student, Faculty	Academic metrics	Pass/Fail prediction with confidence score	High
FR-06	Improvement Suggestions	Student	Prediction result	Personalized recommendations and roadmap	High
FR-07	Roadmap Milestone Management	Student	Milestone details	Updated progress tracker	Medium
FR-08	Skill Assessment Submission	Student	MCQ answers	Score, performance analysis, stored assessment	High
FR-09	Student Records Management	Admin	Student details	Add, Edit, Delete, View student records	High
FR-10	Dashboard & Analytics	Admin, Faculty	Stored academic data	Charts, statistics, prediction summaries	Medium
FR-11	Report Generation	Student, Admin	Student profile and prediction data	Downloadable PDF/Excel report	Medium
FR-12	Audit & Activity Monitoring	Admin	System activity logs	Audit history and flagged records	Low

Table 3.1: Functional Requirements Specification

Requirement ID	Category	Description	Target Metric	Validation Method
NFR-01	Performance	System should respond quickly to user requests.	Average response time < 2 seconds	Load testing using Apache JMeter
NFR-02	Availability	System should remain available for users with minimal downtime.	99% uptime	Deployment monitoring and cloud service logs
NFR-03	Security	Protect user data using JWT authentication, password hashing, and HTTPS.	Secure authentication and encrypted communication	Security testing and vulnerability assessment
NFR-04	Scalability	Support increasing numbers of users and academic records without major performance degradation.	Support 500+ concurrent users	Stress and load testing
NFR-05	Reliability	Ensure accurate prediction and consistent system behavior.	Error rate below 1%	Functional and integration testing
NFR-06	Maintainability	Modular architecture for easier updates and debugging.	Independent modules with reusable code	Code review and maintenance testing
NFR-07	Usability	Provide an intuitive, responsive, and user-friendly interface.	Easy navigation with responsive design	User Acceptance Testing (UAT)
NFR-08	Compatibility	Support modern web browsers and devices.	Chrome, Edge, Firefox, Safari compatibility	Cross-browser testing
NFR-09	Data Integrity	Prevent unauthorized modification or corruption of stored data.	Consistent and validated database records	Database validation and transaction testing
NFR-10	Portability	Application should be deployable on different cloud platforms with minimal configuration changes.	Deployment on Vercel, Render, and similar platforms	Deployment verification


Table 3.2: Non-Functional Requirements Specification
3.3: Sample Design & Database Schema Reference

The database schema consists of four core collections:

Table 3.3: users Collection Schema

Field	Data Type	Description
_id	ObjectId	Primary key, automatically generated by MongoDB
name	String	Full name of the user
email	String	Unique email address used for login
password	String	Encrypted password using bcrypt (hidden by default)
role	String	User role (Admin, Faculty, or Student)
googleId	String	Google OAuth unique identifier (null for local accounts)
resetPasswordToken	String	Token generated for password reset
resetPasswordExpire	Date	Expiration date and time of the reset token
createdAt	Date	Timestamp indicating when the account was created


Table 3.4: students Collection Schema
Field	Data Type	Description
_id	ObjectId	Primary key, automatically generated by MongoDB
rollNumber	String	Unique student roll number
name	String	Full name of the student
email	String	Unique email address of the student
department	String	Academic department (e.g., MCA)
semester	Number	Current semester (1–6)
attendancePercentage	Number	Student's attendance percentage
assignmentMarks	Number	Assignment marks obtained
internalMarks	Number	Internal examination marks (out of 100)
previousCGPA	Number	Previous cumulative CGPA (0–10 scale)
studyHours	Number	Average daily study hours
backlogs	Number	Number of active academic backlogs
prediction	Object	Stores prediction result, confidence score, suggestions, and prediction timestamp
assignedFaculty	ObjectId	Reference to the assigned faculty document
isFlagged	Boolean	Indicates whether the student's profile is flagged for review
flagReason	String	Reason for flagging the student record
roadmapMilestones	Array<Object>	List of improvement milestones with completion status and creation date
createdAt	Date	Timestamp indicating when the student record was created


Table 3.5: skillassessments Collection Schema

Field	Data Type	Description
_id	ObjectId	Primary key, automatically generated by MongoDB
user	ObjectId	Reference to the corresponding user document
category	String	Assessment category (Programming Fundamentals, Web Development, or Data Science)
score	Number	Calculated proficiency score (0–100%)
answers	Array<Object>	Stores each question, selected option, correct option, and correctness status
createdAt	Date	Timestamp indicating when the assessment was submitted

Table 3.6: faculties Collection Schema

Field	Data Type	Description
_id	ObjectId	Primary key, automatically generated by MongoDB
user	ObjectId	Reference to the corresponding user document (Unique)
name	String	Full name of the faculty member
email	String	Unique email address of the faculty
department	String	Department to which the faculty belongs (e.g., Computer Applications)
createdAt	Date	Timestamp indicating when the faculty record was created

Table 3.7: Hardware Requirements (Development & End-User)
User Type	Processor	RAM	Storage	Network	Device / Browser
Developer System	Intel Core i5 (10th Gen) / AMD Ryzen 5 or higher	8 GB (16 GB Recommended)	256 GB SSD (Minimum)	Broadband Internet	Windows 11, Visual Studio Code, Google Chrome
Administrator	Intel Core i3 or equivalent	4 GB	128 GB SSD/HDD	Stable Internet Connection	Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Mozilla Firefox
Faculty User	Intel Core i3 or equivalent	4 GB	128 GB SSD/HDD	Stable Internet Connection	Chrome, Edge, Firefox, Safari
Student (Desktop/Laptop)	Dual-Core Processor or higher	4 GB	64 GB Free Storage	Internet Connection	Chrome, Edge, Firefox, Safari
Student (Mobile)	Android 10+/iOS 15+	3 GB	32 GB Free Storage	4G/5G/Wi-Fi	Chrome, Safari, Mobile Browser

Table 3.8: Software Requirements

Layer	Tool / Technology	Version	Purpose
Operating System	Windows 11	23H2 or Later	Development and application execution
Frontend	React.js	18.x	Building the user interface
Frontend Styling	Tailwind CSS	3.x	Responsive UI design
Build Tool	Vite	5.x	Fast frontend development and bundling
Backend Runtime	Node.js	20.x LTS	Server-side JavaScript runtime
Backend Framework	Express.js	4.x	REST API development
Database	MongoDB Atlas	Latest	Cloud-based NoSQL database
ODM	Mongoose	8.x	MongoDB object modeling
Machine Learning API	Flask	3.x	Hosting the Random Forest prediction model
Machine Learning Library	Scikit-learn	Latest	Training and prediction using Random Forest
Authentication	JWT & Google OAuth 2.0	Latest	Secure user authentication and authorization
Code Editor	Visual Studio Code	Latest	Source code development
API Testing	Postman	Latest	Testing REST API endpoints
Version Control	Git & GitHub	Latest	Source code management and collaboration
Deployment (Frontend)	Vercel	Latest	Hosting the React application
Deployment (Backend)	Render	Latest	Hosting the Express server
Web Browser	Google Chrome / Microsoft Edge	Latest	Running and testing the application
Report Generation	PDFKit	Latest	Generating downloadable PDF reports

3.4: Hardware and Software Requirements

To ensure developer reproducibility and end-user access, hardware and software baselines are established:
Developer System: Minimum Core i5 or equivalent processor, 8 GB RAM, running Windows 11.
End-User Device: Any modern mobile, tablet, or desktop with web access and a standard browser.
Frontend Stack: React.js (v18.x), Tailwind CSS (v3.x), Vite build tool.
Backend Stack: Node.js (v20.x LTS), Express.js (v4.x), Mongoose ODM, pdfkit.

Table 3.9: Requirement Traceability Matrix
Requirement ID	Module	Implementation File / Route	Test Case ID	Status
FR-01	User Registration	/api/auth/register	UT-01, IT-01	✓ Implemented
FR-02	User Authentication	/api/auth/login, /api/auth/me	UT-02, ST-01	✓ Implemented
FR-03	Student Profile Management	/api/students	IT-02, ST-01	✓ Implemented
FR-04	Faculty Assignment	/api/students/:id	ST-04	✓ Implemented
FR-05	Performance Prediction	/api/ai/predict (Flask ML API)	ST-01	✓ Implemented
FR-06	Improvement Suggestions	/api/ai/counsel	ST-02	✓ Implemented
FR-07	Roadmap Management	/api/students/:id/milestones	ST-02	✓ Implemented
FR-08	Skill Assessment	/api/assessments/submit	UT-05, IT-03	✓ Implemented
FR-09	Student Record Management	/api/students	ST-04	✓ Implemented
FR-10	Dashboard & Analytics	React Dashboard Components	ST-01	✓ Implemented
FR-11	Report Generation	/api/report-card/generate	ST-03	✓ Implemented
FR-12	Audit & Activity Monitoring	Admin Dashboard & Audit Logs	ST-04	✓ Implemented

Table 3.10: Risk Register
Risk ID	Risk Description	Probability	Impact	Mitigation Strategy
R-01	Inaccurate academic data entered by users	Medium	High	Validate inputs, implement form validation, and allow faculty verification before prediction.
R-02	Flask ML prediction service becomes unavailable	Medium	High	Implement local rule-based fallback prediction and monitor API health.
R-03	Unauthorized access or data breach	Low	High	Use JWT authentication, bcrypt password hashing, HTTPS, and role-based access control (RBAC).
R-04	Database connectivity failure	Low	High	Enable automatic cloud backups, connection retry mechanisms, and MongoDB Atlas monitoring.
R-05	Performance degradation under heavy load	Medium	Medium	Optimize database queries, caching, and perform load testing before deployment.
R-06	Loss of data due to system failure	Low	High	Schedule regular database backups and disaster recovery procedures.
R-07	Browser compatibility issues	Low	Medium	Perform cross-browser testing on Chrome, Edge, Firefox, and Safari.
R-08	Third-party cloud service downtime (Vercel, Render, MongoDB Atlas)	Low	High	Monitor service status, configure failover mechanisms, and maintain deployment backups.
R-09	Security vulnerabilities in dependencies	Medium	Medium	Regularly update packages, perform security audits, and apply dependency patches.
R-10	Limited prediction accuracy due to insufficient training data	Medium	Medium	Retrain the ML model periodically using larger and more diverse academic datasets.

3.5: Requirement Traceability Matrix & Feasibility Study

Feasibility highlights:
Economic: Leverages free cloud tiers (Vercel, Render, Atlas). Variable API costs are low.
Technical: Mature MERN stack with structured fallback handlers for ML model rate limits.
Operational: Gated Admin/Faculty console allows non-technical staff to moderate records.
Legal: Complies with personal data regulations by limiting third-party API exposure.
Functional mapping is tracked via a matrix ensuring all functional specifications (FR-01 to FR-12) align directly with backend middleware controls and dashboard routes.


Chapter 4: Data Analysis, Interpretation & Implementation

[PASTE FIGURE 4.1 HERE]
Figure 4.1: Home / Landing Page
Suggested content: Screenshot of the PredictEdu landing page showing project title, features, and login access.

[PASTE FIGURE 4.2 HERE]
Figure 4.2: Student Dashboard
Suggested content: Screenshot showing attendance, internal marks, CGPA, backlogs, prediction result, confidence score, and suggestions.

[PASTE FIGURE 4.3 HERE]
Figure 4.3: Prediction Results Page
Suggested content: Screenshot or generated output showing Pass/Fail result, confidence percentage, and improvement recommendations.

[PASTE FIGURE 4.4 HERE]
Figure 4.4: Improvement Roadmap Tracker
Suggested content: Screenshot of milestone checklist where students can add and mark improvement tasks.

[PASTE FIGURE 4.5 HERE]
Figure 4.5: Admin Analytics Dashboard
Suggested content: Screenshot showing charts for attendance vs marks, semester/backlog distribution, prediction counts, and student metrics.

[PASTE FIGURE 4.6 HERE]
Figure 4.6: Mobile Responsive View - Student Dashboard
Suggested content: Mobile screenshot of the student dashboard proving responsive layout.
4.1: Implementation Flow & REST API Surfaces

The platform exposes several critical API routes that handle student metrics, assessment submissions, and AI requests:

Table 4.1: REST API Endpoint Summary

Method	Endpoint	Access Role	Purpose
POST	/api/auth/login	Public	Authenticate user credentials and generate JWT token
POST	/api/auth/register	Admin	Register a new student account
POST	/api/auth/logout	Authenticated User	Terminate the active user session
POST	/api/auth/forgot-password	Public	Generate and send password reset token
PUT	/api/auth/reset-password	Public	Reset password using a valid reset token
GET	/api/auth/me	Authenticated User	Retrieve current logged-in user details
GET	/api/students	Admin, Faculty	View all student performance records
POST	/api/students	Admin	Create a new student performance record
PUT	/api/students/:id	Admin	Update student academic information
PATCH	/api/students/:id/flag	Admin	Flag or unflag a student record with remarks
POST	/api/students/:id/milestones	Student	Add a new improvement milestone
PATCH	/api/students/:id/milestones/:mId	Student	Mark milestone as completed or pending
POST	/api/assessments/submit	Student	Submit MCQ assessment and calculate score
GET	/api/assessments/my	Student	View personal assessment history
GET	/api/assessments/all	Admin, Faculty	View all submitted assessments
POST	/api/ai/counsel	Student	Generate AI-based academic improvement suggestions
POST	/api/ai/performance-review	Student	Generate AI-powered performance review
POST	/api/ai/ats-score	Student	Analyze academic report and generate optimization score
POST	/api/report-card/generate	Student	Generate and download academic performance PDF report

4.2: Data Interpretation Algorithms (ML scoring and aggregate distributions)

The assessment engine parses MCQ selections in real-time, executing a scoring pass:
```javascript
// server/controllers/assessmentController.js (excerpt)
exports.submitAssessment = async (req, res) => {
  try {
    const { category, answers } = req.body;
    let correctCount = 0;
    
    const evaluatedAnswers = answers.map(ans => {
      const isCorrect = ans.selectedOption === ans.correctOption;
      if (isCorrect) correctCount++;
      return { ...ans, isCorrect };
    });
    
    const score = Math.round((correctCount / answers.length) * 100);
    
    const newAssessment = await SkillAssessment.create({
      user: req.user._id,
      category,
      score,
      answers: evaluatedAnswers
    });
    
    res.status(201).json({ success: true, data: newAssessment });
  } catch (err) {
    res.status(500).json({ success: false, error: err.message });
  }
};
```

Roadmap milestone completion operates by toggling the `completed` boolean inside the student's embedded milestones array:
```javascript
// server/controllers/studentController.js (excerpt)
exports.toggleMilestone = async (req, res) => {
  try {
    const { id, milestoneId } = req.params;
    const student = await Student.findById(id);
    if (!student) return res.status(404).json({ success: false, error: 'Student not found' });
    
    const milestone = student.roadmapMilestones.id(milestoneId);
    if (!milestone) return res.status(404).json({ success: false, error: 'Milestone not found' });
    
    milestone.completed = !milestone.completed;
    await student.save();
    
    res.status(200).json({ success: true, data: student });
  } catch (err) {
    res.status(500).json({ success: false, error: err.message });
  }
};
```

4.3: Academic Report Generation and Prediction Evaluation Results

The AI Performance Coach manages performance review loops and report card analysis. In mock performance reviews, the model reviews responses against the targeted role and outputs feedback with a technical question. If rate-limited, it pulls from a local list of core web engineering questions. In academic report evaluations, it calculates a match score and missing keywords using:
```json
{
  "matchScore": 75,
  "missingKeywords": ["Docker", "TypeScript"],
  "optimizationTips": ["Tip 1: Rephrase experience bullet points...", "Tip 2: Add Cloud certification details..."]
}
```

The report card builder parses student metrics to construct a structured single-column layout using pdfkit, rendering the output dynamically on the server to prevent formatting errors:
```javascript
// server/controllers/report cardController.js (excerpt)
const PDFDocument = require('pdfkit');
exports.generateReport CardPDF = async (req, res) => {
  try {
    const student = await Student.findOne({ email: req.user.email });
    const doc = new PDFDocument({ size: 'A4', margins: { top: 40, bottom: 40, left: 40, right: 40 } });
    res.setHeader('Content-Type', 'application/pdf');
    res.setHeader('Content-Disposition', `attachment; filename=Report Card_${student.name.replace(/\s+/g, '_')}.pdf`);
    doc.pipe(res);
    doc.font('Helvetica-Bold').fontSize(22).fillColor('#0f172a').text(student.name, { align: 'center' });
    // Write education, performance metrics, skills, custom projects, and experiences...
    doc.end();
  } catch (err) {
    res.status(500).json({ success: false, error: err.message });
  }
};
```

4.4: Testing & E2E Validation Results (Unit, System, Load checks)

Testing spanned unit, integration, system, load, and cross-browser validations:
Unit Testing: Tested input sanitization, token signing, and score calculations. Jest assertions achieved a 96.4% initial pass rate.
System Testing: E2E checks verified multi-user isolation, roadmap modifications, and PDF download streams.
Performance Load Testing: Tested latency under load using Apache JMeter.

4.4.1 Comprehensive Test Verification Suites

To guarantee platform coverage, multiple testing arrays were run:
- Table 4.2: Representative Unit Test Cases
Test ID	Module / Function	Test Input	Expected Result	Status
UT-01	User Authentication	Valid email and password	User authenticated successfully and JWT token generated	Pass
UT-02	Password Validation	Incorrect password	Authentication denied with appropriate error message	Pass
UT-03	Student Profile Validation	Valid academic details	Student profile saved successfully	Pass
UT-04	Prediction Engine	Student metrics (Attendance, CGPA, Marks, Backlogs)	Pass/Fail prediction with confidence score returned	Pass
UT-05	Skill Assessment Scoring	MCQ responses	Correct score calculated and stored	Pass
UT-06	Roadmap Milestone	Toggle milestone completion	Milestone status updated successfully	Pass
UT-07	Report Generation	Valid student record	PDF report generated without errors	Pass
UT-08	Input Validation	Missing required fields	Validation error displayed	Pass
UT-09	Authorization Middleware	Invalid or expired JWT token	Access denied (HTTP 401 Unauthorized)	Pass
UT-10	Database CRUD Operations	Create, Update, Delete student record	Database operation completed successfully	Pass


- Table 4.3: Integration Test Scenarios

Test ID	Integrated Modules	Test Scenario	Expected Result	Status
IT-01	Authentication + User Database	Register a new user account	User account created successfully and JWT token generated	Pass
IT-02	User Module + Student Module	Create a student profile after registration	Student profile linked correctly with user account	Pass
IT-03	Student Module + Assessment Module	Submit an MCQ assessment	Assessment score calculated and stored successfully	Pass
IT-04	Student Module + ML Prediction API	Send academic metrics for prediction	Prediction result and confidence score returned successfully	Pass
IT-05	Prediction Module + Dashboard	Display prediction results on dashboard	Prediction details visible with recommendations	Pass
IT-06	Student Module + Roadmap Module	Add and update improvement milestones	Roadmap milestones stored and updated correctly	Pass
IT-07	Report Module + Student Database	Generate PDF report from stored student data	PDF report generated successfully	Pass
IT-08	Admin Module + Student Management	Admin updates student academic records	Updated information reflected in database and dashboard	Pass
IT-09	Google OAuth + Authentication	Login using Google account	User authenticated successfully via OAuth	Pass
IT-10	Backend API + MongoDB Atlas	Perform CRUD operations through REST API	Data stored, retrieved, updated, and deleted successfully	Pass

- Table 4.4: System Test Cases
Test ID	Workflow Tested	Test Steps	Expected Result	Status
ST-01	User Registration & Login	Register → Login → Access Dashboard	User account created successfully and dashboard displayed	Pass
ST-02	Student Profile Management	Login → Create/Update Profile → Save Details	Student profile saved and displayed correctly	Pass
ST-03	Performance Prediction	Enter academic metrics → Generate Prediction	Pass/Fail prediction, confidence score, and recommendations displayed	Pass
ST-04	Skill Assessment Workflow	Attempt MCQ assessment → Submit Answers	Score calculated and assessment history updated	Pass
ST-05	Improvement Roadmap	Generate recommendations → Add/Complete milestones	Roadmap updated and progress tracked successfully	Pass
ST-06	Report Generation	Generate and download PDF report	PDF report generated with correct academic details	Pass
ST-07	Admin Student Management	Admin login → Add/Edit/Delete student records	Student records managed successfully	Pass
ST-08	Faculty Monitoring	Faculty login → View assigned students	Student academic details displayed correctly	Pass
ST-09	Authentication & Authorization	Access protected routes without login	Unauthorized access denied (HTTP 401/403)	Pass
ST-10	Logout & Session Handling	Logout → Attempt protected action	Session terminated and redirected to login page	Pass

Table 4.5 should show endpoint, concurrent users, average response time, 95th percentile, and error rate.

Table 4.5: Performance & Load Testing Results

Endpoint	Concurrent Users	Average Response Time	95th Percentile	Error Rate
GET /api/students	100	112 ms	210 ms	0%
POST /api/assessments/submit	100	145 ms	265 ms	0%
GET /api/students/:id	50	320 ms	510 ms	0%
POST /api/report-card/generate	50	680 ms	1.1 s	0%
POST /api/ai/counsel	20	4.8 s	7.9 s	1.5%

4.5: Bug Resolution Log Analysis

Issues identified during QA were catalogued and fixed prior to production release:

Table 4.6: Significant Bug Resolutions

Bug ID	Bug Description	Severity	Resolution	Verification Status
BUG-01	AI endpoints occasionally returned JSON inside Markdown code blocks, causing parsing failures.	Medium	Implemented regular-expression based JSON extraction before processing the response.	Verified – Fixed
BUG-02	Roadmap progress percentage displayed NaN when no milestones existed.	Low	Added validation checks for empty milestone arrays before calculating progress.	Verified – Fixed
BUG-03	Google OAuth login failed when the email already existed as a locally registered account.	Medium	Implemented account-linking verification during OAuth authentication.	Verified – Fixed
BUG-04	PDF report generation timed out for records containing lengthy text fields.	Low	Optimized PDF generation and imposed server-side text length constraints.	Verified – Fixed
BUG-05	Invalid JWT tokens were accepted after prolonged inactivity in some sessions.	Medium	Enhanced token validation and enforced strict expiration checks for protected routes.	Verified – Fixed
BUG-06	JWT tokens were not actively invalidated after user logout.	Medium	Configured 24-hour token expiration and strengthened logout/session handling.	Verified – Fixed


Chapter 5: Conclusions and Suggestions

5.1: Summary of Project Achievements
The project successfully developed PredictEdu as a complete student performance prediction and academic monitoring platform. The main achievement of the project is that it converts routine academic data into useful prediction output. Instead of storing attendance, marks, CGPA, study hours, and backlog details only as static records, the system uses these values to estimate whether a student is likely to pass or fall into an academic risk category.

The project demonstrates the practical integration of the MERN stack with a Python-based Machine Learning service. React.js is used to build responsive dashboards for students, faculty, and administrators. Node.js and Express.js provide the backend REST API for authentication, student management, report generation, system settings, and audit logging. MongoDB stores user profiles, student academic records, prediction results, assessment records, faculty details, and system activity logs. Flask and Scikit-learn provide the ML inference layer through a Random Forest classifier.

A major achievement is the role-based access structure. Admin users can manage student records, faculty accounts, threshold settings, analytics, and reports. Faculty users can monitor and update academic metrics for assigned students. Student users can view their own performance dashboard, prediction result, suggestions, report card, and improvement milestones. This separation makes the system closer to a real institutional platform rather than a single-user demonstration.

The prediction workflow is another important outcome. When a student record is created or updated, academic indicators are sent to the Flask ML API. The API returns a pass/fail prediction with confidence and suggestions. If the ML API is unavailable, the Express backend uses a rule-based fallback so that the application does not stop functioning. This improves operational reliability and shows awareness of real-world service failure scenarios.

The project also includes reporting and administrative support features. PDF report cards can be generated using PDFKit, and consolidated spreadsheet exports can be generated using ExcelJS. Audit logs, flagged records, settings, email notification utilities, and dashboard charts support institutional decision-making. These modules make the project useful for academic review, mentoring, and performance tracking.

Overall, the project achieves its core objective of designing and implementing a cloud-ready, full-stack student performance prediction system. It combines software engineering, database design, machine learning, authentication, analytics, and reporting into one coherent MCA project.

5.2: Limitations & Engineering Reflections

Although the system is functional and demonstrates the intended workflow, it has certain limitations. The first limitation is dependence on the quality of input data. The prediction result is only as accurate as the academic values entered into the system. If attendance, internal marks, assignment scores, CGPA, study hours, or backlog values are incorrect or outdated, the prediction may become misleading.

The second limitation is the size and nature of the dataset. The current model is trained and validated using limited or synthetic student data. Synthetic data is useful for development and demonstration, but a production-level academic prediction model should be trained on larger historical institutional records collected across multiple semesters and batches. Such data would help the model learn more realistic patterns.

The third limitation is that academic performance is influenced by factors beyond the selected features. Health conditions, financial problems, language barriers, family responsibilities, mental stress, classroom participation, and teaching quality can also affect student outcomes. These factors are difficult to quantify and are not fully represented in the current model.

The fourth limitation is ML interpretability. Random Forest provides strong classification performance, but it does not automatically explain every prediction in a human-readable way. The system provides suggestions and confidence values, but faculty judgement is still necessary before taking any serious academic decision based on the prediction.

From an engineering perspective, the project highlights the importance of separating responsibilities between services. Keeping the Flask ML API separate from the Express backend makes the architecture cleaner, but it also introduces dependency management. The backend must handle API timeouts, connection errors, invalid responses, and fallback logic carefully.

The project also shows that security and access control are essential even in academic applications. Student data is sensitive, so authentication, authorization, password hashing, input validation, and role-based access are not optional. The project uses JWT, bcrypt, middleware guards, and Mongoose validation to reduce common risks.

5.3: Future Scope & Advanced Enhancements

The system can be improved in several directions. The most important future enhancement is the use of larger real institutional datasets. If historical attendance, marks, semester results, backlog patterns, and final outcomes are collected over multiple batches, the ML model can be retrained for better accuracy and reliability.

A second enhancement is Learning Management System integration. Instead of manually entering marks and attendance, the platform could import verified data from LMS, ERP, or college attendance systems. This would reduce manual errors and make prediction updates more automatic.

A third enhancement is advanced model explainability. Techniques such as feature importance charts, SHAP values, or rule-based explanation layers could show why a student received a particular prediction. For example, the dashboard could clearly state whether the main risk factor is low attendance, weak internal marks, low study hours, or backlogs.

A fourth enhancement is automated intervention planning. The current milestone system can be expanded into structured improvement plans generated from risk factors. A low-attendance student could receive an attendance recovery plan, a low-marks student could receive subject-wise revision milestones, and a backlog student could receive a backlog clearance schedule.

A fifth enhancement is notification expansion. The existing email alert concept can be extended to SMS, WhatsApp, parent notifications, and scheduled faculty reminders. Escalation rules can also be introduced so that repeated risk cases are automatically highlighted to department heads.

Another future direction is deployment scaling. For larger institutions, prediction, report generation, and email notification tasks can be moved to background queues using Redis or similar systems. This would keep the dashboard responsive even when many users generate reports or predictions at the same time.

The frontend can also be enhanced with richer analytics, including semester-wise trends, attendance-risk heatmaps, department-level comparison, and cohort performance reports. These features would help administrators identify broader academic patterns, not only individual student risk.

5.4: Industrial Applications & Social Impact

PredictEdu has direct application in colleges, universities, coaching institutes, and training organizations. Any institution that tracks learner attendance, assessment marks, progress, and completion status can adapt this system to identify students who require support. The same architecture can also be used by corporate training departments to predict course completion risk or certification performance.

For academic institutions, the system supports evidence-based mentoring. Faculty members can focus attention on students who show measurable risk indicators instead of waiting until final examination results. Administrators can use analytics dashboards and reports for academic review meetings, accreditation documentation, and student support planning.

The social impact of the project lies in early intervention. Many students fail or lose confidence because warning signs are noticed too late. A platform like PredictEdu can help institutions detect those signs earlier and provide timely guidance. This is especially useful in colleges where faculty members manage large batches and cannot manually analyze every student profile in detail.

The system also promotes transparency. Students can see their own academic indicators, prediction status, confidence score, and suggestions. This helps them understand where they stand and what they need to improve. When students receive clear feedback, they are more likely to take corrective action.

In conclusion, PredictEdu demonstrates how full-stack web development and machine learning can be combined to solve a practical academic problem. The project is not a replacement for teachers, mentors, or institutional judgement. Instead, it acts as a decision-support tool that organizes data, highlights risk, generates reports, and supports timely academic guidance.
ANNEXURE
Table A.1: Required Environment Variables

Variable Name	Service	Example Value	Purpose	Required / Optional
PORT	Node.js Server	5000	Specifies the backend server port	Required
NODE_ENV	Node.js	Development	Sets the application environment	Required
MONGO_URI	MongoDB Atlas	mongodb+srv://username:password@cluster.mongodb.net/predictedu	Database connection string	Required
JWT_SECRET	JWT Authentication	your_jwt_secret_key	Secret key used for signing JWT tokens	Required
JWT_EXPIRE	JWT Authentication	24h	Defines JWT token expiration duration	Required
GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID	Google OAuth	xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx.apps.googleusercontent.com	Google OAuth Client ID	Required
GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET	Google OAuth	your_google_client_secret	Google OAuth Client Secret	Required
FLASK_API_URL	Flask ML API	http://localhost:5001/predict	Endpoint for machine learning prediction service	Required
EMAIL_SERVICE	Email Service	Gmail	Email provider used for notifications	Optional
EMAIL_USER	Email Service	support@predictedu.com	Sender email address	Optional
EMAIL_PASSWORD	Email Service	your_app_password	Email account password or app password	Optional
CLIENT_URL	Frontend	http://localhost:5173
URL of the React frontend application	Required




Table A.2: Common Issues and Resolutions

Issue	Possible Cause	Resolution	Related Module
Unable to log in	Incorrect email/password or expired JWT token	Verify credentials or reset password; log in again to generate a new JWT token	Authentication
Google OAuth login failed	Invalid OAuth credentials or network issue	Verify Google Client ID/Secret and OAuth configuration	Authentication
Student data not loading	MongoDB connection failure or API unavailable	Check MongoDB Atlas connection string and restart backend server	Student Management
Prediction not generated	Flask ML API unavailable or invalid input data	Ensure ML service is running; validate academic metrics; fallback rule engine will be used if configured	ML Prediction
PDF report generation failed	Missing student data or PDF generation error	Verify student profile completeness and restart report generation service	Report Generation
Dashboard charts not displaying	Empty database records or API response error	Populate sample data and verify REST API responses	Dashboard & Analytics
Assessment score not saved	Database write failure or invalid assessment data	Validate assessment input and check MongoDB connectivity	Skill Assessment
Slow application performance	High server load or unstable internet connection	Optimize queries, restart services, and ensure stable network connectivity	Backend / Database
Unauthorized access (401/403)	Expired JWT token or insufficient permissions	Log in again or assign the appropriate user role (Admin, Faculty, Student)	Authorization
Email notifications not received	Incorrect SMTP configuration or email service unavailable	Verify email credentials and SMTP settings in the .env file	Notification Service

 A.1 User Manual & Setup Guide
Local Setup:
1. Clone the repository and navigate to the project directory.
2. In the `server` directory, run `npm install`, set your environment variables, and start the API with `npm run dev`.
3. In the `client` directory, run `npm install` and start the frontend with `npm run dev`.

User Workflow:
1. Log in or Register via Google OAuth.
2. Fill academic parameters in the Profile form.
3. Complete technical assessments under the Skill Assessments tab.
4. Access the AI Performance Coach to generate recommendations and run performance review mock trials.
5. Add custom projects and download your academic report PDF report card.

A.2 API Reference
Core Endpoints:
`POST /api/auth/login` - Authenticates user credentials.
`POST /api/auth/register` - Registers a new user.
`POST /api/auth/logout` - Discards access tokens.
`GET /api/auth/me` - Retrives current session details.
`GET /api/students` - Ingests student parameters matrix.
`POST /api/students/:id/milestones` - Registers a new milestone item.
`POST /api/assessments/submit` - Submits quiz responses and computes score.
`POST /api/ai/counsel` - Returns recommended academic improvement paths, match scores, and academic gaps.
`POST /api/ai/performance review` - Interacts with performance reviewer bot.
`POST /api/ai/ats-score` - Calculates academic report keyword mapping ratios.
`POST /api/report card/generate` - Returns a downloadable PDF report card.

A.3 Glossaries & Test Profiles
Simulated Fallback: Local rule-based procedure executing student metrics analysis when ML model requests time out.
Cold-Start: System constraints in recommending paths to users with empty profiles.

Sample Profile details used for evaluation:
Department: MCA, CGPA: 8.2, Attendance: 85%, Programming Fundamentals: 84%, Web: 76%, Data Science: 58%.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Adeyemi, T., & Bello, O. (2025). Machine Learning adoption in African and South Asian EdTech startups: A cost-sensitivity survey. International Journal of Educational Technology, 14(1), 45-62.

Alvarez, M., & Kim, S. (2023). Failure modes in large machine-learning model-based recommendation systems. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, 211-220.

Bianchi, F., & Russo, L. (2023). A comparative security audit of Node.js middleware stacks for production APIs. Journal of Web Engineering Security, 8(2), 101-118.

Choudhury, R., Das, P., & Iyer, S. (2025). Demographic bias in ML model-generated performance recommendations. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, 7(1), 33-47.

Desai, K., & Trivedi, A. (2023). Self-assessment instruments for programming proficiency: A validation study. Computer Science Education, 33(4), 512-530.

Ferreira, J., Santos, M., & Lima, R. (2024). Benchmarking JSON-schema adherence in commercial ML model APIs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11892.

García, P., & Fernandez, L. (2022). JWT versus session-based authentication for distributed REST APIs. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 48(9), 3456-3470.

Scikit-learn Developers. (2025). Random Forest classifier documentation. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.html

Hassan, F., & Al-Mansoori, Y. (2024). Comparing self-, peer-, and instructor-assessment of soft skills in higher education. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 49(2), 211-229.

Kumar, V., Singh, A., & Reddy, N. (2024). Knowledge-graph-based performance recommendation linking skills, courses, and job roles. Expert Systems with Applications, 238, 121823.

Lindqvist, E., & Bergstrom, H. (2022). Mapping academic competencies to industry skill frameworks: A taxonomy. European Journal of Engineering Education, 47(5), 789-805.

Liu, Y., Wang, X., & Chen, Z. (2024). MongoDB schema design patterns for evolving, semi-structured applications. Proceedings of the International Conference on Database Systems, 145-159.

Mehta, R., & Joshi, S. (2024). Retrieval-augmented generation for grounding ML model responses in domain-specific data. Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Conference, 1102-1114.

Nguyen, T., & Tran, H. (2023). Matrix factorization for performance recommendation using skill self-assessments and job postings. Information Systems Research, 34(3), 1023-1041.

Patel, D., Shah, K., & Mehta, P. (2022). Predicting placement likelihood using decision-tree classifiers on historical student data. International Journal of Computer Applications, 184(15), 22-29.

Petrov, I., & Ivanova, S. (2023). Cost and downtime analysis of PaaS hosting for small-scale educational web applications. Journal of Cloud Computing, 12(1), 1-18.

Roy, S., & Banerjee, A. (2023). Large machine-learning models for report card analysis: A comparative human-evaluation study. Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), 1-12.

Singh, J., & Kaur, P. (2024). Rate-limiting and quota-management strategies for applications wrapping machine learning APIs. IEEE Software, 41(3), 67-75.

Wirawan, B., & Putri, D. (2023). Skill-decay modelling in self-assessment-based competency tracking systems. Journal of Educational Technology Research, 19(4), 301-318.

Zhang, L., Liu, M., & Zhao, Y. (2023). Prompt-engineering strategies for structured JSON output from large machine-learning models. Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 4521-4535.


ADDITIONAL DOCUMENT STUDY NOTES AND ARCHITECTURAL SCHEMATICS

The system utilizes automated Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Deployment (CD) frameworks. 
For production hosting, the client static files are deployed on Vercel Edge networks using optimized static asset serving mechanisms.
The server layer runs within a virtual container environment configured on Render.
The MongoDB Atlas database restricts all direct external client queries using IP allowlists, ensuring that only API transactions initiated from Render's designated server network are accepted.

To evaluate recommendation performance:
The local test suite simulated varying CGPAs (spanning 5.0 to 9.5) and attendance factors (from 60% to 95%).
Result evaluation:
- High performance profiles (CGPA >= 8.5, strong attendance, and high internal marks) consistently mapped to Pass predictions with high confidence.
- Moderate profiles (CGPA 7.0 - 8.4) received improvement suggestions based on attendance, internal marks, and study-hour patterns.
- High backlog profiles received risk-focused recommendations emphasizing backlog clearance, faculty guidance, attendance recovery, and internal-mark improvement.

Security standards utilize helmet for security headers, express-rate-limit to protect auth routes, and express-mongo-sanitize to parse NoSQL parameter inputs.

This report summarizes development executed between March and June 2026.
All referenced student names and registration details used in tables and metrics represent synthetic test profiles compiled to guarantee user privacy.

The platform provides a stable, reproducible reference model for AI EdTech development.
