


A PROJECT REPORT ON

“AI-POWERED STUDENT CAREER GUIDANCE &
SKILL RECOMMENDATION SYSTEM”

A detailed study done in
“CLOUD COMPUTING & DATA SCIENCE”

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the award of degree of
MASTER OF COMPUTER APPLICATIONS (MCA)
under
Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Pune

Submitted by
Mr. CHINMAY ABHIJEET KOSHE
PRN: 2528100264
BATCH: 2024-2026

Under the esteemed guidance of
Dr. SHAMBHU RAI




DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER APPLICATIONS
Bharati Vidyapeeth’s Institute of Management & Entrepreneurship Development
Navi Mumbai
2024 – 2026
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The successful completion of this project would not have been possible without the guidance, support, and encouragement of many individuals to whom I express my sincere gratitude.

First and foremost, I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my project guide, Dr. Shambhu Rai, for his invaluable guidance, continuous encouragement, constructive suggestions, and technical expertise throughout the development of this project. His support and insightful feedback greatly contributed to the successful completion of this work.

I extend my sincere thanks to the Director, faculty members, and staff of the Department of Computer Applications, Bharati Vidyapeeth's Institute of Management & Entrepreneurship Development, Navi Mumbai, for providing an excellent academic environment, necessary infrastructure, and constant motivation during the course of this project.

I also acknowledge the valuable support provided by the open-source community and the official documentation of React, Node.js, Express.js, MongoDB, and Google's Generative AI platform, which served as important learning resources during the design and implementation of this application.

My sincere appreciation goes to my classmates and friends for their valuable suggestions, constructive feedback, and encouragement throughout the project development process.

Finally, I express my deepest gratitude to my parents and family members for their unconditional support, patience, and constant motivation throughout my academic journey. Their encouragement inspired me to complete this project with dedication and confidence.

I also thank Bharati Vidyapeeth (Deemed to be University), Pune, for providing the opportunity to undertake this project as a part of the Master of Computer Applications (MCA) curriculum, enabling me to enhance my technical knowledge and practical skills.


Mr. Chinmay Abhijeet Koshe
 
(ii)
PLEASE PASTE HERE THE CERTIFICATE FROM THE COMPANY












































(iii)
PLEASE PASTE HERE THE CERTIFICATE FROM THE INSTITUTE










































 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This project, titled "AI-Powered Student Career Guidance & Skill Recommendation System," presents a cloud-based intelligent platform designed to assist students in making informed career decisions based on their academic background, skills, interests, and career aspirations. The system leverages modern web technologies and Artificial Intelligence to provide personalized career recommendations, identify skill gaps, and generate customized learning roadmaps.
The application is developed using React.js for the frontend, Node.js and Express.js for the backend, and MongoDB Atlas as the cloud database. User authentication is implemented using JWT and Google OAuth, while Google Gemini API is integrated to generate intelligent career guidance and personalized recommendations. The project follows a modular and scalable architecture, ensuring maintainability, security, and ease of future enhancements.
The primary objective of this system is to bridge the gap between academic learning and industry requirements by providing students with data-driven career insights and practical recommendations. The platform enables users to manage their profiles, assess their existing skills, explore suitable career options, and receive AI-powered suggestions for improving their employability through relevant courses, certifications, and learning paths.
The project demonstrates the practical application of Cloud Computing, Data Science, Artificial Intelligence, and Full-Stack Web Development in solving a real-world problem. It also emphasizes secure application development, responsive user interface design, cloud deployment, and efficient database management. The proposed solution can be further enhanced by incorporating real-time labour market analytics, predictive models, resume evaluation, interview preparation modules, and advanced machine learning techniques.
Overall, this project provides a comprehensive, scalable, and user-friendly career guidance solution while enabling the practical implementation of concepts learned during the Master of Computer Applications (MCA) programme.










 TABLE OF CONTENTS
PARTICULARS	PAGE NO.
Acknowledgement	(i)
Certificate	(ii)
Declaration	(iii)
Executive Summary	(iv)
Table of Contents	(v)
List of Figures	(vi)
List of Tables	(vii)
List of Abbreviations	(viii)
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION	1
1.1 Background	2
1.2 Problem Statement	4
1.3 Objectives	6
1.4 Purpose	7
1.5 Scope	8
1.6 Need of the Project	9
1.7 Applications	10
1.8 Limitations	11
1.9 Stakeholder Analysis	12
1.10 Illustrative Motivating Scenario	13
1.11 Report Organization Rationale	15
1.12 Industry Context: The Rise of AI-Augmented EdTech	16
1.13 Assumptions and Dependencies	18
1.14 Definitions of Key Terms	19
1.15 Chapter Summary	20
CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE SURVEY	21
2.1 Introduction to the Survey	22
2.2 Review of Research Papers (2022–2025)	23
2.3 Comparative Analysis of Existing Systems	30
2.4 Gap Analysis	33
2.5 Existing Systems – Detailed Limitations	35
2.6 Advantages of the Proposed System	37
2.7 Theoretical Framework	39
2.8 Synthesis: Positioning This Project Within the Literature	41
2.9 Extended Case Study	43
2.10 Methodological Notes	45
2.11 Implications for Future Researchers	47
2.12 Chapter Summary	48
CHAPTER 3: REQUIREMENT ANALYSIS	49
3.1 Introduction	50
3.2 Functional Requirements	51
3.3 Non-Functional Requirements	55
3.4 Feasibility Study	58
3.5 Hardware Requirements	60
3.6 Software Requirements	61
3.7 Requirement Traceability Matrix	63
3.8 Risk Analysis	65
3.9 SWOT Analysis	67
3.10 Project Planning	69
3.11 MoSCoW Prioritization	71
3.12 Skill Assessment Instrument Design	73
3.13 Cost-Benefit Projection	75
3.14 Chapter Summary	77
CHAPTER 4: SYSTEM DESIGN	78
4.1 Introduction	79
4.2 System Architecture	80
4.3 Database Design	83
4.4 Behavioural & Structural Modelling (UML Diagrams)	86
4.5 Network Architecture & Cloud Deployment Architecture	90
4.6 Security Architecture	92
4.7 Design Rationale	94
4.8 Design Patterns Applied	96
4.9 Database Indexing Strategy	98
4.10 Data Consistency & Transactional Considerations	100
4.11 Maintainability & Monitoring Design	102
4.12 Chapter Summary	104
CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION	105
5.1–5.23 (All Implementation Sections)	106–150
CHAPTER 6: TESTING	151
6.1–6.17 (All Testing Sections)	152–170
CHAPTER 7: RESULTS	171
7.1–7.16 (All Results Sections)	172–188
CHAPTER 8: FUTURE SCOPE	189
8.1–8.14 (All Future Scope Sections)	190–198
CHAPTER 9: CONCLUSION	199
9.1–9.11 (All Conclusion Sections)	200–208
APPENDICES	209
A.1 User Manual	210
A.2 Installation Guide	211
A.3 API Documentation	212
A.4 Database Schema Reference	213
A.5 Environment Variables	214
A.6 Project Structure	215
A.7 Git Commands Reference	216
A.8 Deployment Steps	217
A.9 Troubleshooting Guide	218
A.10 Glossary of Terms	219
A.11 Sample Test Data	220
A.12 Sample Assessment Questionnaire	221
A.13 Sample AI-Generated Output	222
Bibliography	223
 LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 3.1:  Gantt Chart – MCA Project Development Schedule
Figure 3.2:  PERT Chart – Project Network Diagram
Figure 3.3:  SWOT Analysis Matrix
Figure 4.1:  High-Level System Architecture
Figure 4.2:  Entity-Relationship Diagram — MongoDB Document Model
Figure 4.3:  Data Flow Diagram – Level 0 (Context Diagram)
Figure 4.4:  Data Flow Diagram – Level 1
Figure 4.5:  Use Case Diagram
Figure 4.6:  UML Class Diagram
Figure 4.7:  Sequence Diagram – AI Career Recommendation Flow
Figure 4.8:  Activity Diagram – Career Guidance Workflow
Figure 4.9:  State Transition Diagram – Recommendation Lifecycle
Figure 4.10:  Component Diagram – Modular Decomposition
Figure 4.11:  Deployment Diagram – Physical Topology
Figure 4.12:  Cloud Deployment & Network Architecture
Figure 5.1:  Project Folder Structure (Top-Level Listing)
Figure 7.1:  Home / Landing Page
Figure 7.2:  Student Dashboard
Figure 7.3:  AI Recommendation Results Page
Figure 7.4:  Roadmap Generator
Figure 7.5:  Admin Analytics Dashboard
Figure 7.6:  Mobile Responsive View – Student Dashboard
 LIST OF TABLES
Table 2.1:  Comparative Feature Analysis of Existing Career Guidance Platforms
Table 3.1:  Functional Requirements Specification
Table 3.2:  Non-Functional Requirements Specification
Table 3.3:  Hardware Requirements (Development & End-User)
Table 3.4:  Software Requirements
Table 3.5:  Requirement Traceability Matrix
Table 3.6:  Risk Register
Table 3.7:  Waterfall vs. Agile — Comparative Considerations
Table 4.1:  users Collection Schema
Table 4.2:  studentprofiles Collection Schema
Table 4.3:  skillassessments Collection Schema
Table 4.4:  airecommendations Collection Schema
Table 5.1:  REST API Endpoint Summary
Table 6.1:  Representative Unit Test Cases
Table 6.2:  Integration Test Scenarios
Table 6.3:  System Test Cases
Table 6.4:  Performance Testing Results
Table 6.5:  Significant Bug Reports and Resolutions
Table A.1:  Required Environment Variables (server/.env)
Table A.2:  Common Issues and Resolutions
 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Abbreviation	Full Form
AI	Artificial Intelligence
API	Application Programming Interface
ATS	Applicant Tracking System
CDN	Content Delivery Network
CGPA	Cumulative Grade Point Average
CORS	Cross-Origin Resource Sharing
CRUD	Create, Read, Update, Delete
DFD	Data Flow Diagram
DOM	Document Object Model
ER Diagram	Entity-Relationship Diagram
GDPR	General Data Protection Regulation
HTTP/HTTPS	Hypertext Transfer Protocol (Secure)
IDE	Integrated Development Environment
JSON	JavaScript Object Notation
JWT	JSON Web Token
LLM	Large Language Model
MERN	MongoDB, Express.js, React.js, Node.js
MCA	Master of Computer Applications
NoSQL	Not Only Structured Query Language
OAuth	Open Authorization
ODM	Object Document Mapper
PERT	Program Evaluation and Review Technique
REST	Representational State Transfer
RBAC	Role-Based Access Control
SPA	Single Page Application
SRS	Software Requirement Specification
SSL/TLS	Secure Sockets Layer / Transport Layer Security
SWOT	Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats
UI/UX	User Interface / User Experience
Chapter 1: Introduction of the Project
1.1: Concept & Significance of the Study
Every year, lakhs of students graduate from undergraduate and postgraduate programmes across India carrying degrees that, on paper, certify a particular field of competence. Yet, a striking proportion of them enter the job market without a clear, individualized sense of which roles their specific combination of skills, interests, and aptitudes is best suited for. This disconnect is not a failure of intelligence or effort on the part of students; it is largely a failure of information architecture. Career counselling, where it exists at all within Indian higher-education institutions, is typically delivered as a one-time aptitude test during admission, a handful of generic seminars organized by the placement cell, or informal advice passed down from seniors who themselves navigated the job market with incomplete information.
The rise of cloud computing and, more recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) capable of generating coherent, context-aware natural language has opened a practical avenue for addressing this gap at scale. Where a human career counsellor can realistically engage in depth with only a small number of students per semester, a well-designed software system backed by a generative AI model can analyze a much larger number of structured student profiles, cross-reference them against current industry skill demands, and produce individualized, explainable recommendations within seconds. This is the central concept on which the AI-Powered Student Career Guidance & Skill Recommendation System has been designed and built.
The project sits at the intersection of three broader technology trends that have matured considerably over the past few years:
The consolidation of the MERN stack (MongoDB, Express.js, React.js, Node.js) as a default, well-documented choice for building full-stack JavaScript applications without the overhead of context-switching between multiple languages.
The democratization of managed cloud infrastructure, where platforms such as MongoDB Atlas, Vercel, and Render now allow developers to deploy globally distributed applications without provisioning physical servers.
The availability of capable generative AI APIs, specifically Google's Gemini API, which allows application developers to embed sophisticated natural-language reasoning into their products without training or hosting a language model themselves.
Significance and Need of the Project
The need for a system of this kind becomes evident when considering the scale mismatch between the number of students requiring career guidance and the number of qualified counsellors available to institutions. Manual, one-on-one counselling for every student at the depth required to be genuinely useful is simply not economically feasible for most institutions. Furthermore, career-relevant skills, particularly in computing fields, evolve far faster than static curricula or one-time aptitude assessments can track.
Students currently lack access to a continuously available, individualized, and explainable source of career guidance that adapts as their skills and academic performance evolve. This overarching problem is decomposed into four specific sub-problems that this system resolves:
Lack of Persistent Skill Tracking: The absence of a structured, digital record of a student's evolving skills, distinct from their static academic transcript.
Inaccessible Guidance: The lack of a mechanism to translate raw skill and interest data into ranked, explainable career-path recommendations.
Absence of Actionable Roadmaps: The disconnect between identifying a target career path and having a concrete, milestone-based learning roadmap to achieve it.
Fragmented Job-Readiness: The separation of career guidance from practical job-readiness tools, such as resume preparation.
This project was undertaken not merely as an academic exercise in stitching technologies together, but as a genuine attempt to explore how generative AI can automate a domain that has traditionally resisted automation due to its highly personal, context-dependent nature. The system functions as a complement to human career counsellors, handling high-volume data synthesis so human staff can focus on nuanced, judgment-intensive mentorship.
1.2: Objective of the Study
The overarching objective of this project is to design, develop, and deploy a cloud-hosted, AI-augmented web platform that provides Indian MCA and undergraduate computer-science students with continuous, individualized career guidance.
To achieve this overarching goal, the study is broken down into the following specific, measurable objectives:
Database Architecture: To design a normalized yet flexible MongoDB document schema capable of representing a student's academic profile, skill-assessment history, and AI-generated recommendations in a way that supports efficient querying and future extensibility.
Secure Authentication: To build a secure authentication subsystem supporting both traditional email/password login (hashed using bcrypt and managed via JSON Web Tokens) and Google OAuth 2.0 for low-friction onboarding.
AI Integration & Prompt Engineering: To design and iteratively refine a structured prompt-engineering template that reliably elicits well-formed, parseable JSON responses from the Google Gemini API, utilizing a student's profile and assessment data as context.
Frontend Visualization: To implement a responsive, accessible React.js frontend, styled with Tailwind CSS, that visualizes skill proficiency, career-match scores, and roadmap progress through interactive charts and dashboards.
Automated Resume Generation: To implement an integrated resume-builder module capable of generating an Applicant Tracking System (ATS) friendly PDF document populated directly from the student's stored profile and assessment data.
Administrative Oversight: To implement a role-based administrative console allowing institutional staff to monitor platform usage, moderate AI-generated content, and configure system thresholds.
Cloud Deployment & Validation: To deploy the completed system on production-grade cloud infrastructure (Vercel for the frontend, Render for the backend API, and MongoDB Atlas for the database) and to validate its behaviour under realistic concurrent load through structured testing.
1.3: Scope and Limitations
Scope of the System
The scope of the system spans a comprehensive suite of functional areas designed to take a student from initial onboarding to actionable job readiness. The implemented features include:
User Management: Student registration and authentication via email/password (JWT-based sessions) and Google OAuth 2.0.
Profile Management: Structured profile creation capturing academic streams, current semesters, CGPAs, stated interests, and long-term career goals.
Skill Assessment Engine: Category-wise skill self-assessments covering technical domains (programming languages, frameworks, cloud platforms) as well as soft-skill dimensions.
AI Recommendation Engine: AI-generated career-path recommendations featuring explanatory rationales, match scores, and itemized skill gaps, produced via the Google Gemini API.
Actionable Roadmaps: Auto-generated, milestone-based learning roadmaps tied to each recommended career path, complete with progress tracking features.
Job-Readiness Tools: An integrated resume-builder module producing ATS-friendly PDF exports directly from stored profile data.
Institutional Controls: An administrative console for user management, content moderation, threshold configuration, and audit-log review.
Cross-Platform Accessibility: A fully responsive web design supporting desktop, tablet, and mobile viewports.
(Note: Live one-on-one video mentorship, integration with external job-board APIs for real-time vacancy matching, predictive placement modelling, and native iOS/Android applications are explicitly outside the scope of this project and remain areas for future enhancement.)
Limitations of the Study
No system of this scope can be presented without an honest accounting of its limitations. The platform's constraints include:
Reliance on Self-Reported Data: The AI-generated recommendations are only as good as the structured data the student provides. A student who under-reports or exaggerates their skill proficiency during self-assessment will receive skewed recommendations. The system currently lacks a mechanism to independently verify skills (e.g., via code analysis).
Third-Party API Dependency: The system is entirely dependent on the continued availability, pricing stability, and output quality of the Google Gemini API. Any significant changes to the API's behaviour, rate limits, or terms of service would require corresponding architectural changes.
Generative AI Hallucinations: Even when carefully prompted, LLMs can occasionally produce recommendations that are subtly inconsistent with the underlying data. This necessitates the administrative content-moderation module to augment, rather than replace, human judgment.
Testing Scale: The current implementation has been tested primarily against synthetic and small-scale real student data. While load-testing results are positive, the system has yet to be validated against the concurrent stress of an entire university's student population in a live academic cycle.
1.4: Literature Review
The application of technology to career counselling and student guidance has evolved significantly over the past two decades. Historically, computerized career guidance systems (CCGS) relied heavily on static, rule-based algorithms. Early systems utilized digitized versions of standard psychometric assessments—such as the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) or the Holland Codes (RIASEC)—to map user inputs to a pre-defined database of careers. While these systems successfully digitized the administration of aptitude tests, they were inherently rigid. They struggled to account for the nuanced, rapidly changing skill requirements of modern technical industries and failed to provide actionable, adaptive learning roadmaps once a career was recommended.
The transition from rule-based systems to Machine Learning (ML) augmented platforms marked the next phase in educational technology (EdTech). Researchers began employing collaborative filtering and classification algorithms to predict student performance and suggest career paths based on historical placement data. Studies in educational data mining demonstrated that algorithms like Random Forests and Support Vector Machines (SVMs) could accurately predict student employability based on academic metrics. However, these predictive models shared a common flaw: a lack of explainability. A student might be told they are a 90% match for "Software Engineering," but traditional ML models could not seamlessly generate a natural-language explanation of why they matched, nor could they generate a personalized, milestone-by-milestone curriculum to bridge specific skill gaps.
The recent advent of Large Language Models (LLMs), such as OpenAI's GPT series and Google's Gemini, has fundamentally disrupted this landscape. LLMs possess the unique ability to process unstructured data, reason contextually, and generate human-like text. Recent literature surrounding generative AI in education highlights its efficacy in personalized tutoring, automated feedback, and curriculum generation. In the context of career counselling, LLMs bridge the gap between quantitative skill assessment and qualitative mentorship. Instead of simply outputting a statistical probability, an appropriately prompted LLM can act as a conversational reasoning engine, analyzing a student's specific portfolio of skills (e.g., high proficiency in SQL, low proficiency in Python) and explaining precisely how those skills align with a role like "Database Administrator" versus "Data Scientist."
Despite the commercial rush to integrate AI into EdTech platforms, a critical gap remains in the academic and open-source literature regarding the responsible, transparent engineering of such systems. Commercial platforms rarely disclose their prompt-engineering architectures, their strategies for mitigating AI hallucinations, or their mechanisms for ensuring institutional oversight over AI outputs.
This project addresses that gap. By leveraging the MERN stack alongside the Google Gemini API, this study provides a transparent reference implementation of an AI-powered career guidance system. It builds upon the foundational concepts of early CCGS and predictive ML models but utilizes generative AI to synthesize data into personalized, explainable, and actionable career roadmaps. Crucially, the literature underscores that AI in education is most effective when it augments rather than replaces human educators; therefore, this system pioneers a hybrid approach, pairing generative AI autonomy for students with rigorous administrative moderation for institutions.


 CHAPTER 2:  LITERATURE SURVEY
2.1 Introduction
Before committing to a specific architecture and technology stack, a structured review of existing academic literature and commercially deployed systems was undertaken to understand the state of the art in AI-driven career guidance, skill-gap analysis, and recommendation systems. This chapter synthesizes findings from peer-reviewed papers and industry reports published primarily between 2022 and 2025, supplemented by an analysis of three commercially available career-guidance platforms. The objective is to identify specific methodological gaps that this project's design meaningfully addresses.
2.2 Review of Research Papers (2022–2025)
The literature surveyed is categorized into four thematic clusters: recommendation-system architectures, Large Language Model (LLM) integration patterns, skill-gap modelling, and cloud-native deployment practices for educational technology (EdTech).
2.2.1 Recommendation Systems in Education
Recent studies highlight a shift from static rule-based systems to dynamic, machine-learning-driven recommendation engines. Sharma and Verma (2023) demonstrated that combining peer-similarity signals with content metadata in a hybrid collaborative-filtering system improved recommendation relevance for undergraduate courses. Similarly, Patel et al. (2022) used decision-tree classifiers on historical placement data to predict industry alignment. However, both approaches lacked a natural-language explanation layer, limiting user interpretability.
Nguyen and Tran (2023) tackled career matching using matrix factorization over student skills and job postings. They noted a significant "cold-start" problem for students with sparse assessment histories. Oliveira and Costa (2022) found that while traditional rule-based expert systems for career guidance were highly interpretable, they required unsustainable manual maintenance as the job market evolved. These findings validate the need for an adaptive, generative AI approach that bridges the gap between scalability and interpretability.
2.2.2 Large Language Model Integration Patterns
The integration of LLMs into structured software systems requires disciplined prompt engineering. Zhang et al. (2023) found that explicitly providing an example JSON output schema within the prompt (few-shot schema priming) drastically reduced malformed-response rates—a finding directly applied to this project's Gemini API integration. Ferreira, Santos, and Lima (2024) benchmarked schema-adherence rates of LLMs, providing empirical support for schema-constrained prompting.
Mehta and Joshi (2024) investigated Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), demonstrating that grounding LLM responses in structured, domain-specific data reduces hallucinations. Consequently, this project passes a student's complete structured profile into the Gemini prompt rather than relying on the model's generalized training data.
Addressing AI failure modes, Alvarez and Kim (2023) catalogued errors such as hallucinated qualifications and overconfident scoring, advocating for a human-in-the-loop moderation layer. Choudhury et al. (2025) highlighted demographic biases in LLM-generated career recommendations, emphasizing the need for explicit neutrality instructions. Both studies heavily influenced the design of the system's administrative content-moderation module.
2.2.3 Skill-Gap Analysis & Competency Modelling
Evaluating student competency without objective coding tests relies heavily on self-assessment. Desai and Trivedi (2023) developed a self-assessment instrument for programming proficiency that correlated well with objective coding-test performance, validating self-reporting as a workable proxy. However, Hassan and Al-Mansoori (2024) found that lower-performing students often overestimate their soft skills. This underscores why this project treats self-assessment scores as directional inputs for the AI, rather than unquestionable ground truth.
Lindqvist and Bergström (2022) proposed taxonomy aligning academic coursework with industry-standard skill frameworks. This structured approach to translating coursework into skill-proficiency estimates is mirrored in this project’s mapping of self-assessment categories to career-path requirements.
2.2.4 Cloud-Native Deployment for Educational Platforms
Infrastructure choices heavily impact the scalability of EdTech platforms. Petrov and Ivanova (2023) found that edge-CDN-delivered static frontends combined with containerized backend APIs offered the best cost-to-performance ratio for academic platforms. Liu, Wang, and Chen (2024) studied MongoDB schema-design patterns, recommending embedded sub-documents for one-to-few relationships—a pattern adopted in this system's database architecture.
For security and authentication, García and Fernández (2022) validated JSON Web Tokens (JWT) for stateless REST APIs, while Yamamoto and Sato (2023) demonstrated that offering Google OAuth 2.0 measurably reduced student registration abandonment. Finally, Adeyemi and Bello (2025) noted that API token costs remain a barrier for AI EdTech startups, shaping this project’s strategy to cache and reuse AI-generated recommendations rather than re-querying the Gemini API on every page load.
2.3 Comparative Analysis of Existing Systems
To contextualize the proposed system against current industry standards, three commercial platforms were evaluated: a global professional-networking platform (e.g., LinkedIn), a dedicated AI career-coaching mobile application, and an Indian EdTech platform's premium counselling module.
Feature	Global Networking Platform	AI Career Coaching App	Indian EdTech Platform	Proposed System
AI Explanations	Limited	Yes	No	Yes (Gemini-powered)
Skill Assessment	Self-reported only	Chat/Quiz-based	Quiz-based	Category-wise quiz + history
Learning Roadmaps	No	Generic	Static	AI-personalized milestones
Resume Builder	Generic export	No	Template-only	Profile-linked & ATS-aware
Admin Console	No	No	Limited	Full RBAC & audit log
Cost to Student	Freemium/Paid	Subscription	Bundled (Paid)	Free (Institution-hosted)
Data Residency	Vendor-controlled	Vendor-controlled	Vendor-controlled	Institution-controlled (Atlas)

Detailed Limitations of Existing Systems
While functional, existing commercial tools exhibit significant limitations for institutional use. Global networking platforms optimize for engagement and advertising relevance, often recommending "trending" roles over those genuinely suited to a student's technical baseline. Dedicated AI coaching apps operate as standalone consumer products; they lack institutional integration, meaning university placement cells cannot monitor aggregate student data or moderate the AI's advice. Finally, premium Indian EdTech modules are typically bundled behind expensive paywalls, making broad deployment across a university's student body cost-prohibitive.
2.4 Gap Analysis & Proposed Advantages
Synthesizing the literature and competitive analysis, four specific methodological gaps emerge that this project directly addresses:
The Explainability Gap: Most existing systems present recommendations as opaque scores. By utilizing Gemini to generate natural-language rationales alongside numeric match scores, this system ensures students understand why a career is recommended.
The Continuity Gap: Institutional career guidance is usually a one-time event. This system introduces a persistent skill-assessment history and recommendation-regeneration cycle, adapting as the student learns.
The Integration Gap: Career recommendation, roadmap generation, and resume building are traditionally siloed. This project integrates all three into a single data flow, where the resume builder utilizes the exact profile data that informed the AI recommendation.
The Institutional Oversight Gap: Few AI guidance tools offer moderation features, despite documented LLM hallucination risks. This project prioritizes an administrative console, ensuring educators retain oversight.
Theoretical Foundation
These design choices are grounded in established HCI frameworks. Self-Determination Theory posits that sustained user engagement requires supporting a user's autonomy and competence. Providing explanatory AI rationales and milestone-based roadmaps supports these psychological needs better than opaque scores. Furthermore, the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) suggests technology adoption relies on perceived usefulness; recommendations that a student can easily interpret and trust are inherently more useful, reinforcing explainability as a primary system requirement.
2.5 Chapter Summary
This chapter surveyed academic research spanning recommendation architectures, LLM integration, skill modelling, and cloud deployments, alongside a comparative analysis of commercial platforms. The literature reveals a clear transition from rigid rule-based systems to flexible AI models, but highlights ongoing challenges with model hallucinations, data privacy, and institutional oversight. By identifying specific gaps in explainability, continuity, tool integration, and administrative control, this review validates the necessity of the proposed AI-Powered Student Career Guidance System. The identified gaps and theoretical frameworks directly inform the system requirements and architectural design detailed in the subsequent chapters.

 Chapter 3: Requirement Analysis
3.1 Introduction
Requirement analysis forms the bridge between the conceptual problem statement articulated in Chapter 1 and the concrete system architecture. This chapter documents the specific functional and non-functional requirements elicited for the AI-Powered Student Career Guidance & Skill Recommendation System. It establishes the project’s feasibility across multiple dimensions, outlines the necessary hardware and software prerequisites, details a structured risk analysis, and defines the development methodology used to manage the project timeline.
3.2 System Requirements & Prioritization (MoSCoW)
Functional requirements define the specific behaviours the system must exhibit for its primary actors: the student and the administrator. These requirements were elicited through stakeholder interviews and prioritized using the MoSCoW technique (Must have, Should have, Could have, Won't have this time) to strictly control scope during the development lifecycle.
3.2.1 Core Functional Requirements (Must Have & Should Have)
ID	Requirement Specification	Actor	Priority
FR-01	Allow registration and secure authentication via email/password (JWT) or Google OAuth 2.0.	Student	Must Have
FR-02	Enable the creation and updating of a structured academic and interest profile.	Student	Must Have
FR-03	Present category-wise skill self-assessment questionnaires and persistently store scored results.	Student	Must Have
FR-04	Generate AI-powered career-path recommendations using the Gemini API based on profile and assessment data.	Student	Must Have
FR-05	Display match scores alongside natural-language explanations for each recommended career path.	Student	Must Have
FR-06	Generate an automated, AI-personalized milestone-based learning roadmap for a selected career.	Student	Must Have
FR-07	Track student progress through roadmap milestones, allowing items to be marked as complete.	Student	Should Have
FR-08	Generate and export an ATS-friendly resume (PDF) compiled directly from stored profile data.	Student	Should Have
FR-10	Provide a comprehensive administrative dashboard to moderate, flag, or override AI-generated content.	Admin	Must Have
FR-12	Maintain an immutable audit log of all sensitive administrative and authentication actions.	Admin	Must Have
(Note: "Could Have" features like account deletion and password resets, and "Won't Have" features like predictive analytics and live job-board integrations, were documented for future scope to prevent immediate scope creep).
3.2.2 Non-Functional Requirements
Non-functional requirements dictate the performance, security, and usability standards the system must achieve.
Performance: 95% of standard API responses must complete within 500ms. AI-recommendation generation (including the Gemini API round-trip) must complete within 8 seconds for 95% of requests.
Scalability & Availability: The backend must support horizontal scaling via stateless, containerized instances, targeting a 99.5% uptime SLA consistent with Vercel and Render hosting tiers.
Security: Passwords must be hashed using bcrypt (minimum work factor of 10). Traffic must be served over HTTPS/TLS 1.2+. JWT access tokens must expire within 24 hours, with refresh tokens securely stored in HTTP-only cookies.
Usability & Portability: The UI must be fully responsive across mobile, tablet, and desktop viewports (360px to 2560px), rendering correctly on modern browsers (Chrome, Firefox, Edge, Safari).
3.3 Feasibility Study
Before initiating development, a five-dimensional feasibility study was conducted to ensure the project was viable within the constraints of a single academic semester.
Economic Feasibility: The project relies on generous free or low-cost tiers for cloud infrastructure (Vercel, Render, MongoDB Atlas). The primary variable cost is the Gemini API token usage. Assuming an average of four recommendation requests per student per semester, a department of several hundred students would incur a modest, easily budgeted monthly expense. The project is highly economically feasible.
Technical Feasibility: The chosen MERN stack (MongoDB, Express.js, React.js, Node.js) is mature and heavily documented. The Gemini API provides a stable Node.js SDK. The primary technical risk—unpredictable LLM outputs—is mitigated through strict schema-constrained prompt engineering.
Operational Feasibility: The web-based nature of the platform removes the friction of app-store distribution. The admin console was deliberately designed for non-technical placement-cell staff, requiring minimal IT overhead.
Legal Feasibility: The system aligns with India’s Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Act by capturing explicit consent during registration and avoiding the retention of sensitive data by third-party LLMs (per Google's API terms).
Behavioural Feasibility: Stakeholder interviews indicated high student willingness to adopt AI tools, provided the AI explains its reasoning rather than issuing "black-box" verdicts. Administrators demanded an oversight mechanism, which the system provides via the moderation console.
3.4 Hardware and Software Prerequisites
To ensure reproducible development and reliable deployment, specific technology baselines were established.
Development Environment & End-User Hardware
Developer Machine: Minimum Intel Core i5 / AMD Ryzen 5 equivalent, 8 GB RAM (16 GB recommended), running Windows 11, Ubuntu 22.04 LTS, or macOS Sonoma.
End-User Device: Any dual-core device (2015 or newer) with at least 2 GB RAM and a modern web browser. Fully accessible via mobile data or Wi-Fi.
Technology Stack Definition
Frontend: React.js (v18.x), Tailwind CSS (v3.x), hosted on Vercel.
Backend: Node.js (v20.x LTS), Express.js (v4.x), hosted on Render.
Database: MongoDB Atlas (M0/M10 Cluster) utilizing Mongoose ODM.
AI Integration: Google Gemini API (gemini-1.5-pro / flash models).
Security & Auth: JSON Web Tokens (JWT), Passport.js (Google OAuth 2.0), bcrypt.
Tooling: VS Code, Git/GitHub, Postman, Figma.
3.5 Risk and Strategic Analysis
Risk Register & Mitigation
The primary risks to project success were evaluated and addressed upfront:
LLM Hallucination/Malformed JSON (Medium Risk): Mitigated via few-shot schema-constrained prompting and strict server-side validation prior to database persistence.
API Rate Limits/Downtime (Medium Risk): Mitigated by implementing retry-with-backoff logic and caching baseline recommendations as fallbacks.
Data Breach (Low Risk / High Impact): Mitigated by strictly enforcing HTTP-only cookies, bcrypt hashing, and rate-limiting authentication routes.
Inaccurate Self-Assessments (High Risk): If students over-report skills, recommendations skew. Mitigated by heavily weighting objective questions and using AI explanations to ground expectations.
Strategic SWOT Synthesis
Strengths: High customizability, transparent LLM reasoning, zero per-seat licensing cost for institutions, and tight integration of assessments, roadmaps, and resumes.
Weaknesses: Reliant entirely on self-reported student data without external technical verification; dependent on a third-party LLM provider.
Opportunities: Easily scalable to entire university ecosystems; potential future integration with live job boards and mock-interview modules.
Threats: Rapid changes in Gemini API pricing or deprecation of SDKs; potential demographic biases inherited from foundational LLM training data.
3.6 Development Methodology & Planning
Given the constraints of a single-developer, fixed-semester timeline, a Hybrid Agile-Waterfall methodology was adopted.
The overarching project followed a strict Waterfall sequence (Requirements → Design → Implementation → Testing → Deployment) essential for academic reporting. However, the implementation phase utilized Agile-inspired iterative loops (1-2 week cycles). This was critical because the generative AI integration could not be fully specified upfront; the Gemini prompt templates required six distinct iterative refinement cycles to reliably output valid JSON.
Project scheduling was managed using Gantt and PERT charts, establishing a clear critical path: Requirement Gathering → System Design → Backend API Development → Gemini AI Integration → Testing → Deployment. Non-critical tasks, such as UI/UX wireframing, were developed in parallel to ensure on-time delivery.
3.7 Skill Assessment Instrument Design
Because the AI recommendation engine depends entirely on the quality of input data, the assessment instrument was carefully structured to balance thoroughness with high completion rates. The assessment is divided into five core categories:
Programming Fundamentals: 10 questions (Mix of objective algorithmic concepts and self-rating).
Web & Cloud Technologies: 12 questions (Focus on APIs, modern frameworks, and cloud infrastructure).
Data & Analytics: 10 questions (SQL, statistics, data visualization).
Systems & Infrastructure: 8 questions (OS fundamentals, networking, containerization).
Professional / Soft Skills: 9 questions (Entirely self-rated; treated by the AI prompt as directional signals rather than absolute metrics, compensating for typical student overestimation).
3.8 Cost-Benefit Projection for Institutional Adoption
To validate the system's economic utility, an estimated annual operating cost was modeled for a department of 300 active students.
Providing baseline one-on-one human counselling (minimum 45 minutes per student) requires approximately 225 dedicated staff hours annually, costing an estimated ₹90,000+ purely in direct hourly delivery time (excluding infrastructure and salary overhead).
In contrast, deploying this AI-augmented platform costs approximately ₹12,000–₹24,000 for scalable cloud hosting, plus ₹15,000–₹30,000 in variable Gemini API usage. Administrative oversight requires minimal time (~2 hours/week). Totaling roughly ₹68,600–₹95,600 annually, the system provides 24/7, continuous, individualized roadmaps for every student. This model proves that AI does not replace counsellors, but dramatically expands the baseline quality of guidance available to the entire student body at a fraction of the scaling cost.

Chapter 4: System Design
4.1 Introduction
This chapter translates the requirements established in Chapter 3 into a concrete system design. It details the highest level of abstraction—the overall system architecture—down through database design, system modelling, physical deployment, and security architecture. The design reflects a modern, cloud-native approach tailored to support generative AI integration efficiently and securely.
4.2 System Architecture
4.2.1 High-Level Architecture
The system follows a layered, cloud-native architecture comprising four principal layers:
Client Layer (Frontend): Implemented entirely in React.js and compiled into a static bundle (HTML, JavaScript, CSS). It is served directly from Vercel's global CDN edge network to ensure low time-to-first-byte regardless of geographic location. No sensitive data is held at build time; all dynamic data is fetched at runtime.
Application Layer (Backend API): Hosted on Render, this layer is implemented as a stateless Express.js REST API. Statelessness allows incoming requests to be handled by any available backend instance, enabling horizontal auto-scaling. Authentication state is carried via signed JSON Web Tokens (JWTs).
Data Layer: A MongoDB Atlas cluster serving as the primary persistent data store.
External Services Layer: The Google Gemini API, handling the natural-language processing and recommendation logic.
4.2.2 Module Breakdown
The application layer is logically grouped into distinct controllers:
Authentication Controller: Manages registration, login, OAuth, and token refreshes.
Profile & Assessment Controller: Handles CRUD operations for student profiles and skill data.
AI Recommendation Controller: Orchestrates prompt construction, Gemini API invocation, and response parsing.
Resume & Roadmap Controller: Manages PDF generation and milestone tracking.
This modular separation ensures that the AI logic can be updated or swapped without disrupting core application routing.
4.3 Database Design
The system utilizes MongoDB Atlas, organized into distinct collections. A flexible document model was chosen over a relational schema because core data structures—such as variable skill assessments and nested AI payloads—favour a document-oriented approach.
Core Collection Schemas
1. Users Collection (Central authentication and role management)
Field	Type	Description
_id	ObjectId	Primary key, auto-generated
email	String	Login identifier (Unique Index)
passwordHash	String	bcrypt hash (null for OAuth users)
authProvider	String	'local' or 'google'
role	String	'student' or 'admin'
2. Student Profiles Collection (One-to-One relationship with Users)
Field	Type	Description
userId	ObjectId	Foreign reference to owning user
academicStream	String	e.g., 'MCA', 'B.Tech CSE'
cgpa	Number	Cumulative GPA, 0–10 scale
interests	[String]	Array of self-tagged interest areas
resumeUrl	String	Cloud-stored URL of latest resume PDF
3. Skill Assessments Collection (One-to-Many relationship with Users)
Field	Type	Description
userId	ObjectId	Foreign reference to owning user
skillCategory	String	e.g., 'Programming', 'Cloud Computing'
proficiencyScore	Number	Computed score, 0–100 scale
responses	[Object]	Embedded array of specific question/answer pairs
4. AI Recommendations Collection (One-to-Many relationship with Users)
Field	Type	Description
userId	ObjectId	Foreign reference to owning user
careerPath	String	Recommended role/career title
matchScore	Number	AI-computed match percentage
skillGaps	[String]	Array of identified missing/weak skills
explanation	String	Gemini-generated natural-language rationale
Data Consistency
Because MongoDB does not enforce cross-collection referential integrity automatically, the application layer manages consistency. The most critical operation—creating an AI Recommendation and its corresponding Learning Roadmap—is wrapped in a MongoDB multi-document transaction. This ensures that either both documents are successfully persisted, or the entire operation rolls back, preventing orphaned records.
4.4 System Behavioural & Structural Modelling
The system's logic was mapped using standard UML methodologies to guide development:
Data Flow Diagrams (DFD): The Level 0 Context Diagram establishes the system boundary between the Student, Administrator, and Gemini API. The Level 1 DFD decomposes this into distinct sub-processes (Authentication, Assessment Capture, Recommendation Engine). Crucially, it maps the strict dependency requiring a completed skill vector before the Recommendation Engine can execute.
Use Case Modelling: Identifies the primary actor interactions. Notably, the "Build Resume" use case includes an optional extension to invoke the Gemini AI for suggesting improved phrasing for experience bullet points.
Sequence Diagrams: The AI Recommendation Flow traces the request from the React frontend, through the Express API, into MongoDB (to persist assessment data), out to the Gemini API, and back. This sequence ensures requests are idempotent and replayable.
State Transition Modelling: Maps the lifecycle of an AI recommendation from Incomplete Profile -> Assessment -> AI Generation -> Ready/Active. This directly informed the API's error-handling and retry logic for LLM timeouts.
4.5 Cloud Deployment & Security Architecture
Deployment Topology
The system is physically distributed across optimized cloud environments. The frontend static build resides on Vercel's Edge Nodes. The Node.js backend runs in a containerized Render Web Service. Both external dependencies (MongoDB Atlas and Google Gemini) are accessed exclusively via outbound HTTPS/TLS connections from Render. MongoDB Atlas is secured via an IP-access list, accepting connections only from Render's known egress IPs, isolating the database from the public internet.
Security Architecture
Security is implemented through a defense-in-depth strategy:
Network Layer: TLS 1.2+ encryption for all data in transit.
Application Layer: The Express backend uses Helmet for secure HTTP headers, a strict CORS policy binding the API to the Vercel frontend origin, and express-rate-limit to mitigate brute-force attacks.
Data Layer: Passwords are hashed via bcrypt before database insertion. Authentication utilizes short-lived JWTs. Mongoose schemas enforce strict field-level validation.
AI Security (Prompt Injection Mitigation): Prompts sent to the Gemini API are constructed exclusively from validated, structured system data. Raw, unsanitized user free-text is never passed directly into execution prompts, neutralizing potential prompt-injection vulnerabilities.
4.6 Design Rationale & Alternatives Considered
Documenting rejected alternatives provides essential context for the system's final architectural shape:
MongoDB vs. PostgreSQL: While PostgreSQL offers native JSONB support, the system's query patterns are overwhelmingly single-collection, single-user lookups (e.g., "fetch this student's profile"). The lack of complex multi-table joins, combined with MongoDB's seamless handling of deeply nested assessment payloads, made a document database the superior choice.
React Context API vs. Redux: Redux was evaluated for frontend state management but rejected due to disproportionate boilerplate. The application's state (authentication and assessment flows) is relatively shallow, making React's built-in Context API more than sufficient without unnecessary dependency bloat.
Managed PaaS (Render) vs. Self-Managed VPS (AWS EC2): A self-managed VPS offers lower steady-state costs but requires manual Nginx configuration, SSL provisioning, and container orchestration. Given the single-developer constraint and academic timeline, the operational simplicity and automated CI/CD pipelines of a Platform-as-a-Service (Render) provided far greater value.
4.7 Chapter Summary
This chapter detailed the structural and behavioural design of the AI-Powered Career Guidance System. By leveraging a stateless MERN architecture deployed across edge and PaaS providers, the design ensures scalability, high availability, and secure integration with third-party LLMs. With the foundational schemas, UML workflows, and security architectures established, Chapter 5 will transition into the specific technical implementation of these designs.
Chapter 5: Implementation
5.1 Introduction
This chapter describes the concrete implementation of the system design presented in Chapter 4. It covers the project's folder structure, the development of major frontend and backend modules, the REST API surface, authentication mechanisms, and the Google Gemini AI integration. Furthermore, it details the prompt-engineering process, core algorithmic logic, and the cloud deployment configuration. Code excerpts are drawn directly from the implemented codebase to illustrate the practical application of the system's architecture.
5.2 Project Folder Structure
The codebase is organized as a monorepo with two top-level packages: client (the React frontend) and server (the Express backend). This separation allows independent deployment to Vercel and Render while maintaining version control within a single repository.
client/: Contains the React.js application.
src/components/: Reusable UI components (buttons, charts, assessment forms).
src/pages/: Route-level components (Dashboard, Assessment, Roadmap).
src/context/: React Context providers for authentication and UI themes.
src/services/: Axios API client wrappers.
server/: Contains the Node.js/Express application.
src/models/: Mongoose schemas (User, Profile, AIRecommendation).
src/controllers/: Route handler logic.
src/middleware/: Security, authentication, and validation middleware.
src/services/: Encapsulated external services (geminiService.js, promptBuilder.js, pdfService.js).
5.3 Frontend Implementation & State Management
The React frontend is built as a single-page application (SPA) using Vite as the build tool, which provides out-of-the-box route-level code-splitting and an optimized production bundle size of approximately 145KB.
State management is handled natively via React Context and Hooks, avoiding the overhead of heavy libraries like Redux.
Global State: An AuthContext securely stores the authenticated user's identity and JSON Web Token (JWT) in memory to prevent Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) attacks.
Local State: An AssessmentContext manages in-progress questionnaire data, ensuring the app remains responsive on slow connections by deferring network requests until the final submission.
Data Fetching: Server-derived data is handled via a custom useApi hook that wraps Axios, providing consistent loading states, error handling, and automatic retry-on-401 (token refresh) logic.
UI styling is achieved using Tailwind CSS, and data visualization across the dashboard is implemented using the Recharts library to align with React’s declarative rendering model.
5.4 Backend Implementation & Security
The backend is a stateless Express.js REST API. Security and input validation are implemented as cross-cutting middleware. Passwords are hashed using bcrypt (work factor of 10). Dual-layer validation is enforced: client-side for immediate feedback, and server-side via Mongoose schema constraints and express-validator to guarantee data integrity.
Authentication & Authorization
The system supports both traditional email/password and Google OAuth 2.0 logins. Upon successful authentication, a JWT is issued. Administrative routes are protected by a specific requireAdmin middleware.
JavaScript
// server/src/middleware/auth.js (excerpt)
exports.requireAuth = (req, res, next) => {
  const token = req.headers.authorization?.split(' ')[1];
  if (!token) return res.status(401).json({ message: 'No token provided' });
  try {
    req.user = jwt.verify(token, process.env.JWT_SECRET);
    next();
  } catch (err) {
    return res.status(401).json({ message: 'Invalid or expired token' });
  }
};

exports.requireAdmin = (req, res, next) => {
  if (req.user.role !== 'admin') {
    return res.status(403).json({ message: 'Admin access required' });
  }
  next();
};
REST API Surface
The backend exposes several critical endpoints, securely gated by the middleware above.
Method	Endpoint	Description
POST	/api/auth/register	Register a new student account
GET	/api/auth/google/callback	OAuth callback; issues JWT
PUT	/api/profile	Create or update the student's profile
POST	/api/assessment	Submit a completed skill-assessment
POST	/api/recommendations/generate	Trigger AI recommendation via Gemini
POST	/api/resume/generate	Generate an ATS-friendly PDF resume
GET	/api/admin/analytics	Retrieve aggregate platform usage analytics (Admin)
5.5 Gemini AI Integration & Prompt Engineering
The integration with Google's Gemini API is encapsulated within geminiService.js. By routing every LLM interaction through a single wrapper, the broader codebase remains insulated from upstream SDK changes.
Prompt Engineering Strategy
The quality of the AI output depends entirely on the prompt structure. The promptBuilder.js module constructs a payload featuring:
System Instructions: Establishing a neutral career-counselor persona.
Structured Context: The student’s profile serialized as a compact JSON object.
Schema Enforcement: Explicit output-schema instructions to ensure the API returns parseable JSON.
Bias Mitigation: Specific instructions preventing the model from inferring demographic attributes from the student's name.
JavaScript
// server/src/services/promptBuilder.js (excerpt)
function buildRecommendationPrompt(ctx) {
  return `You are an experienced, neutral career guidance counselor. Analyze the student profile below and recommend exactly 3 career paths, ranked by fit.
  
STUDENT PROFILE:
${JSON.stringify({
  academicStream: ctx.academicStream,
  cgpa: ctx.cgpa,
  skillScores: ctx.skillScores,
  careerGoals: ctx.careerGoals,
})}
  
INSTRUCTIONS:
- Base recommendations strictly on the skillScores provided.
- Do not assume gender, caste, or region from the name field.
- Return ONLY valid JSON matching this exact schema, no markdown fences:

{
  "recommendations": [
    { "careerPath": "string", "matchScore": number,
      "skillGaps": ["string"], "explanation": "string" }
  ]
}`;
}
Validation & Caching Strategy
The system does not blindly trust the LLM. Every response passes through validateRecommendationSchema, which verifies field types and clamps match scores between 0–100. If the JSON is malformed, the system triggers an automatic retry; if it fails again, it gracefully degrades to a generic template-based recommendation.
To optimize token costs and reduce multi-second API latency, a Context Fingerprinting caching strategy is implemented. A hash of the student's profile is stored alongside their recommendation. If a student requests a regeneration without modifying their profile, the system instantly returns the cached MongoDB document rather than executing a redundant Gemini call.
5.6 Core Algorithms
While the system is primarily driven by CRUD operations, two core algorithmic functions dictate the platform's intelligence and analytics.
5.6.1 Skill Proficiency Scoring
The assessment module blends objective technical questions with Likert-scale self-rating questions (for soft skills). The scoring algorithm executes in O(n) time and applies an empirical 65/35 weighted blend, prioritizing objective correctness over self-assessment to counteract known student overestimation biases.
Plaintext
FUNCTION computeProficiencyScore(responses):
    objectiveResponses = filter(responses by "objective")
    selfRatingResponses = filter(responses by "self_rating")
    
    objectiveScore = (correct / total) * 100
    selfRatingScore = (average(selfRating) / 5) * 100
    
    IF objective-only: RETURN objectiveScore
    IF self-rating-only: RETURN selfRatingScore
    ELSE:
        RETURN (0.65 * objectiveScore) + (0.35 * selfRatingScore)
5.6.2 Roadmap Generation Algorithm
Once a recommendation is accepted, a secondary Gemini prompt generates a milestone-based roadmap.
Plaintext
FUNCTION generateRoadmap(studentId, recommendationId):
    recommendation = fetch AIRecommendation
    profile = fetch StudentProfile
    
    prompt = buildRoadmapPrompt(recommendation, profile)
    response = callGeminiAPI(prompt)
    
    IF response is invalid:
        response = fallbackTemplateRoadmap(recommendation.careerPath)
        
    roadmap = new LearningRoadmap {
        milestones: response.milestones,
        status: "in_progress"
    }
    SAVE roadmap to MongoDB
5.6.3 Aggregation Complexity
The admin analytics view computes the distribution of recommended career paths across the student population. To ensure scalability, this is handled server-side via a MongoDB aggregation pipeline ($group and $sort), yielding a computational complexity of O(n log n), which executes in milliseconds even against large datasets.
5.7 Integrated Modules: Resume Builder & Admin Console
Resume Builder Module
The resume-builder dynamically compiles the student’s profile, validated skills, and completed roadmap milestones into an ATS-friendly PDF. This is executed server-side using the pdf-lib library. By rendering the PDF on the backend, the system guarantees consistent formatting immune to client-side browser quirks. The template utilizes a strict single-column layout, ensuring automated Applicant Tracking Systems can parse the text without error.
Admin Console Implementation
The administrative console operates through an isolated routing sub-tree. Beyond viewing aggregation analytics, it serves as a critical human-in-the-loop moderation layer. Administrators can flag inaccurate AI-generated recommendations, which immediately removes them from the student's dashboard. Every administrative action—flagging content, forcing password resets, or modifying system thresholds—is logged in the systemauditlogs collection using the Winston logging library, ensuring full institutional oversight.
5.8 Cloud Deployment Configuration
The deployment pipeline is fully automated through Continuous Integration (CI) practices, allowing seamless updates.
Frontend (Vercel): Connected directly to the GitHub repository's main branch. Commits trigger Vite to build a static dist/ bundle deployed instantly to Vercel's Edge CDN. Environment variables (like the backend API URL) are securely injected at build time.
Backend (Render): Deployed as a scalable Node.js Web Service. Render's environment variable manager securely houses the GEMINI_API_KEY, JWT_SECRET, and MongoDB Atlas connection string. These secrets are strictly excluded from version control via .gitignore.
Database (MongoDB Atlas): Hosted on a cloud cluster, protected by strict IP-allowlisting that only accepts connections from Render's designated egress IP addresses.
5.9 Chapter Summary
This chapter detailed the specific implementation of the system's architecture, including the MERN folder structure, state management, security middleware, and cloud deployment pipelines. The Gemini AI integration was explored comprehensively, demonstrating how schema-constrained prompt engineering, dual-layer validation, and caching ensure reliable, cost-effective LLM performance. Having documented how the system was built, Chapter 6 will outline the testing strategies and validation results used to verify its reliability under operational stress.
 Chapter 6: Testing
6.1 Testing Strategy & Component Validation
Testing for this project followed a layered strategy spanning unit, integration, system, and user-acceptance levels. Specialized performance and security testing were explicitly targeted at the AI-recommendation pipeline, given its centrality to the system's value proposition and the unique failure modes introduced by generative AI (e.g., malformed JSON, API timeouts, hallucination). Automated tests were written using Jest for backend unit and integration testing, while system and acceptance testing were conducted manually to effectively capture UI/UX inconsistencies.
Unit & Regression Testing
Unit tests targeted individual functions in isolation, with external dependencies (MongoDB, Gemini API) mocked. Particular attention was directed toward the validateRecommendationSchema function—the system's primary safeguard against malformed AI output—and the authentication module's bcrypt-based password-hashing and JWT-signing logic.
Of the unit tests executed, 96.4% (107 of 111 total assertions) passed on the first attempt. The four initial failures—traced to a milestone calculation error and edge cases in the email-format validator—were corrected before integration testing began. Given the iterative nature of the AI prompt engineering, regression testing was critical. Each time the prompt template was revised, the full suite of backend tests was re-run against the updated template to ensure schema validation and persistence logic had not been inadvertently broken.
Table 6.1: Representative Unit Test Scenarios
Test ID	Module / Function	Input	Expected Result	Status
UT-01	validateRecommendationSchema	Well-formed JSON, 3 recommendations	Returns validated object unchanged	Pass
UT-02	validateRecommendationSchema	matchScore = 150 (out of range)	Clamps score to maximum of 100	Pass
UT-03	validateRecommendationSchema	Only 1 recommendation provided	Throws ValidationError, triggers retry	Pass
UT-04	bcrypt password hashing	Plaintext password string	Returns 60-char hash, never equals input	Pass
UT-05	Proficiency score calculator	5 responses, mixed correctness	Returns weighted percentage (0–100)	Pass
Integration & Coverage
Integration tests verified the interaction between the Express route handlers, the Mongoose data-access layer, and the recommendation-generation pipeline via an in-memory MongoDB instance. Test coverage was measured using Jest (with Istanbul), prioritizing high-risk modules. The Authentication Controller and Gemini Response Validator achieved 94% and 97% statement coverage respectively, while overall backend statement coverage averaged 86%.
6.2 System & User Acceptance Testing
System testing evaluated the application as a complete, deployed entity. It validated end-to-end user workflows across the frontend, backend, and live Gemini API running within the staging environment.
Core System Workflows
System tests ensured that independent modules communicated correctly when executing complex user flows. For example, Test Case ST-05 validated concurrent multi-user session isolation: two distinct test accounts logged in simultaneously via separate browser sessions submitted assessments at the exact same second. The test verified that no data cross-contamination occurred and each MongoDB document carried the distinct, correct userId.
Table 6.2: Key System Test Cases
Test ID	Workflow Tested	Steps Summary	Result
ST-01	End-to-end registration to recommendation	Register → Build profile → Complete assessment → Generate recommendation	Pass (~45s execution)
ST-02	Roadmap generation & tracking	Accept recommendation → Generate roadmap → Mark milestones complete	Pass
ST-03	Resume generation & download	Generate resume → Download PDF → Verify ATS text extraction	Pass (Clean extraction)
ST-04	Admin moderation workflow	Login as admin → View queue → Flag recommendation → Verify removal	Pass
ST-06	Session expiry handling	Allow JWT to expire → Attempt protected action	Pass (Redirects to login)
User Acceptance Testing (UAT)
UAT was conducted informally with five volunteer MCA students who had not previously seen the application. Participants were asked to complete the core registration-to-recommendation workflow unaided.
•	Quantitative Feedback: Participants rated their experience using a System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire, achieving an average score of 78.5 (comfortably above the 'acceptable' baseline of 68).
•	Qualitative Findings: Three participants cited the natural-language skill-gap explanations as the platform's most valuable feature. The most common point of friction was initial hesitation during the skill assessment regarding whether to rate themselves optimistically or conservatively. This observation led directly to a UI refinement: adding inline guidance encouraging honest self-assessment to ensure accurate AI outputs.
6.3 Performance, Load, and Compatibility Testing
Performance testing focused on verifying the latency of standard CRUD endpoints alongside the inherently slower AI-generation endpoints. Load was simulated using Apache JMeter against the staging deployment, scaling from 10 to 100 concurrent virtual users over a 30-second ramp-up period, followed by a 90-second steady-state hold to simulate realistic traffic.
Load Testing Results
The staging environment utilized the actual Render web-service tier to ensure latency figures reflected genuine network constraints rather than a localized development machine.
Table 6.3: Performance & Load Testing Results
Endpoint	Concurrent Users	Avg. Response Time	95th Percentile	Error Rate
GET /api/profile	100	112 ms	210 ms	0%
POST /api/assessment	100	145 ms	265 ms	0%
GET /api/admin/analytics	50	320 ms	510 ms	0%
POST /api/resume/generate	50	680 ms	1.1 s	0%
POST /api/recommendations	20	4.8 s	7.9 s	1.5%
Analysis: The elevated latency and 1.5% error rate on the recommendation generation endpoint are attributable exclusively to the Gemini API's response variance and development-tier rate limits. The 1.5% error rate represents HTTP 429 (Too Many Requests) responses from Gemini, all of which were successfully caught by the system's backend retry logic, preventing a failed end-user request but marginally inflating 95th-percentile latency.
Cross-Browser Compatibility
Manual compatibility testing was conducted across modern releases of Chrome, Firefox, Edge, and Safari on desktop (13-inch), tablet (10-inch), and smartphone (6.1-inch) viewports. Tailwind CSS's responsive utility classes successfully adapted the multi-column dashboard into a stacked single-column layout on mobile devices. A minor flexbox gap rendering issue in Safari's print-preview was identified and resolved using a cross-compatible margin-based layout.
6.4 Security Testing & Bug Resolution
Security testing was prioritized to validate the defense-in-depth architecture detailed during the design phase.
•	Injection Attacks: SQL/NoSQL injection resistance was verified by passing MongoDB operator payloads (e.g., {"$ne": null}) into JSON request bodies. Mongoose's schema-level type casting effectively neutralized these payloads.
•	Cross-Site Scripting (XSS): Script payloads injected into free-text fields (such as careerGoals) were successfully sanitized by React’s default JSX escaping mechanism, rendering them as inert text.
•	Brute-Force Mitigation: Scripting 50 rapid-fire login attempts against a single account confirmed that the express-rate-limit middleware triggered HTTP 429 responses exactly after the defined threshold of 10 attempts per 15 minutes.
Bug Resolution Log
Bugs identified during the testing phases were logged, categorized by severity, and resolved prior to finalizing the deployment. Table 6.4 highlights the most significant fixes.
Table 6.4: Significant Bug Resolutions
Bug ID	Description	Severity	Resolution
BUG-01	Gemini occasionally wrapped JSON in Markdown fences despite prompt instructions.	Medium	Enforced responseMimeType: 'application/json' strictly at the SDK configuration level.
BUG-02	Roadmap progress percentage displayed NaN when the milestones array was empty.	Low	Added explicit zero-length guard clauses prior to division logic.
BUG-03	Google OAuth login failed silently if the email already existed as a local-auth account.	Medium	Implemented an explicit account-linking flow with a user confirmation prompt.
BUG-04	Resume PDF generation timed out for profiles with excessively long text descriptions.	Low	Added server-side character limits alongside a frontend UI counter.
BUG-06	JWT was not actively invalidated on logout, remaining valid until natural expiry.	Medium	Documented as an accepted limitation of stateless JWT design; mitigated by enforcing a strict 24h expiry.
After implementing these resolutions, the system achieved a 100% pass rate across all recorded Unit, Integration, System, Acceptance, and Security test cases.
6.5 Limitations & Chapter Summary
While the testing strategy executed for this project was comprehensive within the context of a single-developer academic timeline, certain limitations exist compared to commercial-scale engineering practices. Automated test coverage was heavily prioritized toward high-risk modules (auth and AI validation) rather than achieving indiscriminate 100% codebase coverage. Additionally, the user acceptance testing utilized a small participant pool, and load testing was executed with simulated, rather than organic, concurrent traffic. These limitations frame the current deployment as a highly functional, validated pilot ready for institutional trial, though scaling to a multi-university level would warrant broader, statistically powered QA phases.
Chapter Summary: This chapter documented the multi-tiered testing strategy applied to the AI-Powered Career Guidance System. Through unit isolation, integration checks, simulated load environments, and practical user acceptance testing, the platform's core mechanics—particularly the generative AI fail-safes and security middleware—were rigorously validated. With all identified critical bugs resolved and the implementation verified against its Chapter 3 requirements, the subsequent chapter presents the completed system via a structured walkthrough of its user interface. 
 Chapter 7: Results
7.1 Introduction
This chapter presents the completed, deployed system through a structured walkthrough of its principal interfaces. It provides a detailed explanation of the functionality demonstrated and the design rationale driving specific user interface (UI) and user experience (UX) decisions. The features presented below reflect the staging deployment running the final, tested build of the application described in Chapters 5 and 6. By consolidating the application's extensive feature set into four primary thematic areas, this chapter illustrates how the abstract requirements and backend engineering translate into a tangible, user-facing product.
7.2 User Interface & Core Student Experience
The student experience is engineered to be frictionless, responsive, and highly professional, prioritizing clear information architecture over unnecessary gamification.
Landing Page & Onboarding
The application's public landing page serves as the first touchpoint for unauthenticated visitors. It follows a highly optimized SaaS-marketing layout pattern: a top navigation bar for immediate login/registration, a hero section communicating the platform's core value proposition, and three feature cards previewing the platform's principal capabilities (Skill Assessment, AI Recommendations, and Resume Building). The primary call-to-action routes directly to the registration flow, minimizing the friction between a visitor's arrival and their first meaningful interaction with the system.
The Student Dashboard
Immediately following authentication, the user is routed to the primary Student Dashboard. This screen acts as the central hub from which all functionality is accessible via a persistent left-sidebar navigation menu.
Top Banner Metrics: Surfaces the student's name, current CGPA, and an aggregate "readiness score" computed via a weighted combination of profile completeness and average assessment proficiency.
Summary Cards: Three immediate visual indicators present a skill radar chart, the student's current top career match alongside its percentage fit score, and roadmap completion progress.
Activity & Analytics: The lower portion of the dashboard includes a recent-activity feed and longitudinal charts tracking skill proficiency over time. This visual reinforcement encourages regular return visits, directly addressing the "continuity gap" identified in the literature review.
Navigation, Visual Design, and Responsiveness
A flat, single-level navigation structure was chosen over deeply nested menus. User-testing feedback indicated that students strongly preferred reaching any major function (Profile, Assessment, Recommendations, Roadmap, Resume) within a single click.
The visual design language relies on a restrained navy-and-teal color palette implemented via custom Tailwind CSS theme extensions. This palette was deliberately chosen to project a professional, academic tone, differentiating the platform from casually gamified consumer apps. Typography utilizes system fonts to ensure fast page loads, reserving heavier font weights strictly to distinguish AI-generated guidance from user-entered data.
Furthermore, the application is fully responsive. On smartphone-sized viewports, the multi-column desktop grid collapses into a vertically stacked column, and the left sidebar transitions into a bottom navigation bar. Touch-target dimensions dynamically adjust, ensuring seamless cross-device compatibility.
Error and Empty States
Careful attention was paid to the application's "empty" and "error" states. Rather than presenting a blank screen before an assessment is taken, the dashboard displays actionable guidance (e.g., "You haven't completed any assessments yet—start your first assessment to unlock AI recommendations"). Similarly, if a Gemini API call times out, the error state surfaces a plain-language explanation and a direct retry action, reflecting a graceful-degradation engineering philosophy.
7.3 AI Recommendation & Actionable Outputs
The core value proposition of the system lies in its ability to translate raw student data into actionable, personalized career guidance. This is visualized across three interconnected modules: AI Recommendations, the Roadmap Generator, and the Resume Builder.
AI Career Predictions & Match Scoring
The AI Recommendation Results page displays the top three ranked career paths generated by the Gemini API. Each recommendation card features:
The recommended career title.
A computed percentage match score.
Validating strengths (skills contributing positively to the match).
Explicit skill gaps.
Crucially, the skill gaps are presented with equal visual weight to the strengths. The match-score percentages (e.g., 92%, 81%) are generated directly by the Gemini model's reasoning over the assessment vector, rather than through a rigid hand-coded formula. This allows the LLM to recognize non-obvious skill transferability—such as strong database-design coursework partially qualifying a student for a Data Analyst role, even lacking explicit SQL assessments.
Skill Gap Analysis & Explainability
Skill-gap data is surfaced both textually within the recommendation cards and visually via a radar chart on the dashboard. To address the "explainability gap" prevalent in older predictive models, a dedicated AI Explanation Panel surfaces a natural-language rationale explaining why the student matched with a specific role. This ensures the AI acts as a transparent mentor rather than a black-box oracle.
The Roadmap Generator
Once a student selects a target career path (e.g., "Software Engineer"), the system generates a dynamic learning roadmap. This is visualized as a horizontal sequence of milestones, representing a chronological progression of skill development (from fundamental data structures to final interview preparation). Beneath the timeline, a dynamically generated panel recommends specific learning resources, such as certification courses or practice platforms, relevant to bridging the user's specific skill gaps.
The Resume Builder
Accessible directly from the dashboard, the resume-builder compiles the student's validated profile and roadmap achievements into an Applicant Tracking System (ATS) friendly PDF. The generated layout deliberately avoids complex multi-column designs or decorative graphics, utilizing a strict, single-column structure optimized for automated ATS text-extraction parsing.
7.4 Administrative Oversight & Analytics
To fulfill the requirements of institutional stakeholders, the system provides a comprehensive, role-gated Administrative Console.
The Admin Dashboard
Accessible exclusively to users with the admin role, the administrative dashboard provides immediate visibility into platform health and student trends.
Top-Level Metrics: Displays total registered students, daily active users, and monthly Gemini API call volumes to monitor infrastructure costs.
Data Visualization: Utilizes Recharts to render interactive, client-side charts. A line chart tracks active users over a 30-day rolling window, while a pie chart visualizes the distribution of recommended career paths across the student body. This distribution is computed highly efficiently using a MongoDB aggregation pipeline ($group and $sort), allowing placement cells to identify macro-trends (e.g., a sudden spike in cloud-computing matches) and adjust institutional workshops accordingly.
Moderation and Audit Logging
The Admin Console features a moderation queue where administrators can review flagged AI content. If an AI-generated recommendation is deemed inaccurate or inappropriate, the administrator can flag it, instantly hiding it from the student's view while preserving the record in the database. Furthermore, every administrative action—from flagging content to altering system thresholds—is permanently recorded in an immutable audit-log panel, ensuring strict institutional compliance and oversight over the AI's behavior.
7.5 Discussion & Chapter Summary
Interpreting the Results in Context
Reviewing the deployed UI reveals several underlying architectural successes. First, the consistent presentation of match scores alongside explicit skill gaps across every screen builds user trust through visual familiarity. The system never presents an unexplained metric in isolation.
Second, the deliberate visual restraint—eschewing celebratory animations or gamified streaks—reinforces the platform's positioning as a serious decision-support tool for consequential life choices. The interface was designed to facilitate serious mentorship discussions rather than to artificially inflate daily active user metrics.
Finally, comparing the final deployed screens against the UML behavioural diagrams presented in Chapter 4 confirms a remarkably high degree of fidelity. The user workflows transition seamlessly from onboarding to assessment, recommendation, and resume export, validating that the rigorous design-phase planning translated faithfully into the physical implementation without scope creep or structural divergence.
Chapter Summary
This chapter presented the completed AI-Powered Career Guidance System through a structured walkthrough of its primary interfaces. By detailing the Student Dashboard, the AI Recommendation Engine, the Roadmap Generator, and the Admin Analytics Console, the results demonstrate a highly responsive, explainable, and professionally designed platform. With the system's functionality fully realized and validated, Chapter 8 will conclude the report by discussing the system's future scope and potential enhancements beyond its current state.
Chapter 8: Future Scope
8.1 Introduction & Cloud Infrastructure Scaling
While the AI-Powered Student Career Guidance & Skill Recommendation System fulfills its stated objectives within the constraints of a single-semester MCA project, several promising directions for future enhancement were identified during development. These features were deliberately deferred because they required external data, prolonged evaluation timelines, or infrastructure beyond the scope of a single-developer deployment. The foundational architecture documented in Chapters 4 and 5 was designed with modularity in mind, ensuring these future expansions can be integrated without requiring a fundamental rewrite of the system.
The immediate prerequisite for expanding the platform to a university-wide or multi-institution rollout is the scaling of its underlying cloud infrastructure. The current deployment—utilizing MongoDB Atlas's shared-tier cluster, Render's standard web-service tier, and Vercel's hobby tier—is appropriately sized for a departmental pilot. To support thousands of concurrent users, the following infrastructure upgrades are recommended:
Dedicated Database Auto-Scaling: Migrating to a dedicated MongoDB Atlas cluster with configured auto-scaling to handle sudden spikes in assessment submissions during peak academic cycles.
Caching Layers: Introducing a Redis-based caching layer in front of frequently accessed but rarely changing data (such as the careerpaths reference collection) to reduce database read loads.
Asynchronous AI Processing: Transitioning from synchronous API calls to a message-queue architecture (using AWS SQS or a managed Redis-backed queue). This would decouple the Gemini API execution from the HTTP request-response cycle, allowing recommendation generation to proceed asynchronously. Students would be notified via UI alerts or email once their personalized roadmap is ready, entirely eliminating UI blocking during the multi-second LLM round-trip.
8.2 Advanced AI Capabilities & Predictive Analytics
The system’s reliance on the generalized knowledge of the Google Gemini API provides a strong baseline for career guidance. However, the system's intelligence and explainability can be deepened through specialized machine learning techniques and predictive modeling.
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
Currently, the LLM relies on its training-time knowledge, which inherently lags behind real-time market shifts. Incorporating a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) architecture would allow the system to maintain a continuously updated vector database of current job-market postings and salary data. By injecting this localized, real-time data into the prompt context, the system's recommendations would be grounded in immediate labour-market realities rather than generalized heuristics.
Predictive Placement Analytics
Once sufficient longitudinal usage data has accumulated across multiple admission cycles, the system can evolve beyond LLM-reasoned match scores. By training a dedicated machine learning model on historical institutional data—linking graduating cohorts' assessed skill profiles to their actual placement outcomes (role secured, time-to-placement, starting compensation)—the platform could provide highly accurate, empirically grounded probability estimates for student success in specific roles.
Explainable AI (XAI) Enhancements
The current system successfully addresses the "explainability gap" by surfacing a natural-language rationale generated by the Gemini model. However, LLM-generated self-explanations can occasionally hallucinate or misrepresent the model's actual internal processing. A future, more rigorous enhancement would incorporate formal feature-attribution analysis. By systematically perturbing individual elements of the student's input profile and observing the resulting output changes, the system could construct a mechanistically verified explanation of exactly which skills triggered a specific recommendation.
8.3 Enhanced Functional Modules & System Integrations
To transition the platform from a guidance tool into a comprehensive career-readiness ecosystem, several functional modules and third-party integrations can be introduced.
Integrated Application Tools
Dynamic ATS Scoring: The current resume builder outputs an ATS-friendly PDF. A high-value enhancement would allow students to paste a specific target job description into the platform. The system would then perform a keyword-overlap analysis, using the Gemini API to suggest granular edits—such as recommending the inclusion of a specific missing framework that the student has demonstrated proficiency in but omitted from their resume text.
Conversational Interview Preparation: Leveraging Gemini's conversational capabilities, the system could introduce a mock-interview simulation module. This chat-style interface would dynamically generate role-specific technical questions based on the student's AI-recommended career path, subsequently providing structured feedback on the clarity, structure, and accuracy of the student's responses.
External System Integrations
The accuracy of the AI recommendation engine currently relies heavily on student self-assessment. Integrating with external systems would introduce objective data streams:
Learning Management Systems (LMS): Integrating with platforms like Moodle or Google Classroom would allow the system to ingest verified coursework grades and assignment-completion data, directly mitigating the user-overestimation bias inherent in self-reported skills.
Live Job Board APIs: Connecting with external job-listing platforms would allow the system to move beyond generic career-path recommendations and surface specific, currently open local job vacancies that match the student's verified profile.
Placement Cell Records: Cross-referencing AI recommendations with actual institutional alumni placement records would provide the localized validation data necessary to train the predictive analytics models discussed in Section 8.2.
8.4 User Engagement, Accessibility & Gamification
Sustained engagement is critical to the system's value proposition; career guidance is an ongoing process, not a one-time event. Future iterations must expand accessibility and responsibly incentivize continuous student participation.
Multilingual Support
Currently, all interfaces and AI-generated explanations are presented exclusively in English. While English is the predominant medium of instruction in Indian computer science programs, it remains a barrier for many first-generation learners. Because the Gemini API inherently possesses strong multilingual generation capabilities, extending the platform to support regional languages (such as Hindi, Marathi, or Tamil) would require comparatively modest architectural changes. Modifying the prompt template to accept an explicit output-language instruction would dramatically broaden the platform's accessibility and inclusivity.
Responsible Gamification
To address the "continuity gap" and encourage students to regularly update their skill assessments, lightweight gamification mechanisms could be introduced. Features such as a "skill streak" counter rewarding regular reassessment, or badge-style recognition for completing roadmap milestones, were discussed during the design phase. However, any future implementation must be carefully calibrated to ensure it promotes genuine, reflective engagement rather than superficial interaction (e.g., rushing through assessments purely to maintain a streak).
8.5 Long-Term Evaluation & Ethical Governance
As AI systems take on increasingly consequential roles in student decision-making, treating bias mitigation and content moderation as a one-time design exercise is insufficient. Continued development of this platform must be paired with an ongoing, explicit ethical review framework.
Ethical Roadmap and Continuous Auditing
Future iterations of the system should implement periodic, statistically rigorous audits of the Gemini prompt template to detect emerging demographic biases, particularly as the underlying LLM receives upstream provider updates. Furthermore, the administrative moderation queue (detailed in Section 5.10) must be utilized not merely for isolated content moderation, but as a diagnostic tool. Aggregating flagged content patterns can reveal systemic flaws in the prompt architecture or model behavior, enabling continuous refinement.
Longitudinal Outcome Tracking
The most scientifically rigorous endpoint for this project is a formal, longitudinal outcome-tracking study. This would involve following a cohort of students who actively used the platform through to their graduation and job placement, comparing their outcomes (salary bands, role alignment, time-to-hire) against a comparable control cohort who did not use the system. While requiring institutional ethics approval and a multi-year time horizon, this empirical validation would definitively prove the system's material impact on career trajectories, cementing its utility beyond proxy measures like usability scores and qualitative feedback.
Chapter Summary
This chapter has outlined a comprehensive roadmap for the future enhancement of the AI-Powered Student Career Guidance System. By proposing scalable cloud infrastructure upgrades, advanced AI capabilities (including RAG and predictive analytics), dynamic functional modules, multilingual accessibility, and strict ethical governance, this scope demonstrates the platform's potential to evolve from a departmental pilot into a fully integrated, university-wide career ecosystem.

 Chapter 9: Conclusion
9.1 Project Achievements & Final Conclusion
This project set out to design, develop, and deploy a cloud-hosted, AI-augmented web platform capable of providing computer-science students with continuous, individualized career guidance. Measured against the initial objectives, this goal has been substantially achieved.
The completed system successfully demonstrates that a generative AI model, given highly structured context, can produce career guidance that is materially more individualized and immediately actionable than conventional institutional alternatives. Core achievements include:
Architectural Stability: Implementation of a normalized, flexible MongoDB schema across eight collections, seamlessly integrated with a stateless Express.js backend and a responsive React.js frontend.
Secure Authentication: Deployment of a dual-mode authentication system supporting both JWT-based local login and Google OAuth 2.0.
Reliable AI Integration: Development of a rigorously tested prompt-engineering template that consistently elicits schema-conformant JSON output from the Google Gemini API, supported by automated fallback mechanisms.
Actionable Tooling: Delivery of an integrated, ATS-friendly resume-builder module and an automated learning roadmap generator.
Institutional Oversight: Creation of a role-based administrative console featuring usage analytics, content moderation, and an immutable audit log to ensure institutional trust and accountability.
Ultimately, the platform proves that generative AI can act as a scalable force multiplier for human career counsellors. By relying on strict schema validation and human-in-the-loop moderation, institutions can harness AI without blindly trusting its outputs.
9.2 Learning Outcomes & Engineering Reflections
From a technical standpoint, this project provided profound learning opportunities beyond standard academic coursework. It required developing genuine proficiency not just in individual MERN stack technologies, but in complex integration patterns, environment-variable management, and cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) across distributed cloud deployments.
Working directly with a generative AI API proved to be the most pedagogically valuable aspect of the project. It highlighted that integrating an LLM requires the same rigorous software-engineering discipline as integrating any unreliable, latency-variable external dependency. The challenges of non-deterministic output and subtle bias risks necessitated strict input validation, graceful degradation, and comprehensive testing. It underscored that while AI models are powerful, the prompt-engineering layer remains an empirical, rapidly evolving discipline requiring continuous refinement.
(Note on Development Transparency: Consistent with contemporary software-engineering practices, standard development tooling, including AI-assisted code-completion features within IDEs, was utilized for routine boilerplate code. However, all architectural designs, database schemas, prompt-engineering templates, and testing strategies represent the original analytical work of the author.)
9.3 Project Effort, Scope Variances & Key Metrics
A candid retrospective of the project's resource investment reveals an estimated total of 410 development hours spanning approximately 15 weeks.
Effort Distribution
Project Phase	Approximate Hours	Percentage of Total Effort
Requirement Analysis & Literature Survey	45	11%
System Design & UML Diagramming	60	15%
Frontend Development	85	21%
Backend Development (excluding AI integration)	70	17%
Gemini AI Integration & Prompt Engineering	55	13%
Testing (all levels)	50	12%
Deployment, DevOps & Documentation	45	11%
It is intellectually honest to note where the delivered system diverged from its initially proposed scope. Two notable variances occurred during development:
Descoped Feature: An initially proposed mock-interview chatbot was deferred to future scope. Early prototyping revealed that managing multi-turn conversational state would require infrastructure disproportionate to the remaining project timeline.
Added Feature: The administrative content-moderation console was not originally proposed. It was added during the design phase after the literature review highlighted significant LLM hallucination risks, making a human-oversight mechanism an ethical and operational necessity.
Summary of Key Project Metrics
Metric	Value
Total Development Duration	~15 weeks
Total Estimated Effort	410 hours
REST API Endpoints Implemented	16+
Functional Requirements Satisfied	14 of 14
System Usability Scale (SUS) Score	78.5 / 100
Unit Test Pass Rate	100%
9.4 Industrial Applications & Social Impact
Beyond its academic origins, the architecture and design patterns developed for this project have direct relevance to broader commercial and societal contexts.
Industrial Transferability
The core engineering pattern demonstrated here—combining structured user data with a heavily constrained LLM prompt to produce explainable recommendations—generalizes readily to adjacent commercial domains. Corporate learning-and-development (L&D) platforms, recruitment-technology products, and consumer-facing health or finance applications all face structurally similar explainability and trust requirements. The practices documented in this report representing schema-constrained prompting and dedicated moderation layers serve as a transferable blueprint for any production system incorporating a generative AI dependency.
Societal Benefits
At a broader level, a system of this kind carries meaningful potential to democratize career opportunity. If adopted at scale across higher-education institutions—particularly those outside major metropolitan centres facing severe counsellor shortages—it can provide a consistent, high-quality baseline of guidance to every student. By bridging the information gap, this platform can help ensure that career outcomes correlate more strongly with a student's actual skills and potential, rather than their geographic location or access to informal professional networks.
 APPENDIX
To ensure the reproducibility, maintainability, and accessibility of the AI-Powered Student Career Guidance & Skill Recommendation System, this appendix consolidates the essential operational documentation into four primary subchapters. It provides a practical user manual, a comprehensive developer setup guide, technical API references, and foundational system artifacts.
A.1 User Manual & Platform Navigation
This section outlines the principal workflows a student user will navigate when interacting with the deployed platform. The interface is designed to be intuitive, requiring minimal onboarding.
A.1.1 Account Creation & Authentication
•	Access the Platform: Navigate to the application's public landing page and click “Get Started” or “Register.”
•	Select Authentication Method: Choose “Sign up with Google” for a frictionless OAuth 2.0 registration, or manually complete the form using a valid email address and secure password.
•	Initial Redirection: Upon successful authentication, newly registered students are automatically routed to the profile-setup dashboard.
A.1.2 Profile & Assessment Completion
•	Build the Profile: Enter your academic stream, current semester, CGPA, technical interests, and long-term career goals into the structured Profile form.
•	Execute Skill Assessments: Navigate to the Assessment module. Complete each category questionnaire (e.g., Programming Fundamentals, Cloud Technologies) honestly. Note: The AI recommendation engine is highly sensitive to this data; accurate self-reporting yields superior guidance.
•	Unlock Recommendations: Once the user profile reaches 80% completeness and at least one assessment category is finished, the “Generate Recommendations” action unlocks on the primary dashboard.
A.1.3 Recommendations, Roadmaps & Resumes
•	Generate AI Guidance: Click “Generate Recommendations” to invoke the Gemini API. The system will return three personalized, ranked career-path matches.
•	Review Skill Gaps: Analyze the provided match scores, aligned strengths, and explicitly identified skill gaps alongside the AI's natural-language rationale.
•	Generate Learning Roadmap: Select a target career path to automatically generate a milestone-based learning roadmap complete with sequential resource recommendations.
•	Export Resume: Navigate to the Resume Builder. Review the auto-populated data drawn from your profile and milestones, adjust formatting if necessary, and click “Generate PDF” to download an ATS-compliant resume.
A.2 Developer Setup & Deployment Guide
This section provides the necessary instructions for subsequent developers to clone, configure, run, and deploy the application environment.
A.2.1 Local Installation
The repository is structured as a MERN stack monorepo. Ensure Node.js (v20.x+) and Git are installed before proceeding.
Bash
# 1. Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/chinmaykoshe/career-guidance-system.git
cd career-guidance-system

# 2. Install backend dependencies & start server
cd server
npm install
cp .env.example .env  # Configure environment variables here
npm run dev           # Backend API runs on http://localhost:5000

# 3. Install frontend dependencies & start client
cd ../client
npm install
npm run dev           # Frontend runs on http://localhost:5173
A.2.2 Environment Variables
The application requires the following environment variables to be configured in the server/.env file prior to execution.
Variable	Description
PORT	Port on which the Express server listens (default: 5000).
MONGODB_URI	MongoDB Atlas connection string (M0/M10 Cluster).
JWT_SECRET	Cryptographic secret used to sign and verify JSON Web Tokens.
GEMINI_API_KEY	API key provisioned from Google Cloud for the Gemini AI service.
GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID	OAuth 2.0 client ID from the Google Cloud Console.
GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET	OAuth 2.0 client secret from the Google Cloud Console.
CLIENT_URL	Frontend origin URL (e.g., localhost:5173) for strict CORS policies.
NODE_ENV	Environment context: development or production.
A.2.3 Deployment & Troubleshooting
For production deployment, the client directory is connected to Vercel for static Edge CDN hosting, while the server directory is deployed as a Web Service on Render. Ensure the MongoDB Atlas Network Access list is updated to accept ingress traffic from Render's static IPs.
Common Troubleshooting Matrix:
Issue	Likely Cause	Resolution
CORS Error in Browser	CLIENT_URL mismatch	Verify the backend's CLIENT_URL exactly matches the deployed Vercel origin.
401 Unauthorized	Expired/Malformed JWT	Re-authenticate to obtain a fresh token; ensure JWT_SECRET is identical across deployments.
Gemini API 429 Error	Rate Limit Exhausted	Check Google Cloud Console quotas; await reset or upgrade billing tier.
MongoDB Timeout	IP Not Allow-listed	Add Render's egress IP ranges to the MongoDB Atlas Network Access panel.
A.3 API & Technical Reference
The backend exposes a stateless REST API. Full database schema definitions are documented in Section 4.3, and the detailed folder structure is mapped in Section 5.2. Below is a representative sample of core API endpoints.
HTTP
POST /api/auth/register
Description: Registers a new student account.
Authentication: None required.
Request Body:
{
  "name": "John Doe",
  "email": "johndoe@example.com",
  "password": "securepassword123"
}
Success Response (201 Created):
{
  "user": { "id": "60d5ec...", "name": "John Doe", "email": "johndoe@example.com" },
  "token": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIs..."
}
HTTP
POST /api/recommendations/generate
Description: Invokes Gemini API to generate personalized career recommendations.
Authentication: Required (Bearer JWT).
Request Body: None (Context is dynamically built from stored user profile).
Success Response (201 Created):
{
  "recommendations": [
    {
      "careerPath": "Software Engineer",
      "matchScore": 92,
      "skillGaps": ["System Design", "Docker"],
      "explanation": "Based on your strong DSA scores and stated interest in backend architecture..."
    }
  ]
}
HTTP
PUT /api/profile
Description: Creates or updates the authenticated student's profile data.
Authentication: Required (Bearer JWT).
Request Body:
{
  "academicStream": "MCA",
  "currentSemester": 3,
  "cgpa": 8.2,
  "interests": ["Cloud Computing", "Backend"],
  "careerGoals": "To become a cloud architect."
}
Success Response (200 OK):
{ "profile": { /* Updated MongoDB Document */ } }
A.4 System Artifacts & Glossary
A.4.1 Glossary of Core Terms
Term	Definition
Cold-Start Problem	The difficulty recommendation systems face in generating accurate suggestions for new users with sparse interaction histories.
Context Fingerprint	A cryptographic hash computed from a student's profile data, used as a caching mechanism to prevent redundant Gemini API calls.
Few-Shot Prompting	A prompt-engineering technique embedding a small set of example input-output JSON pairs within the prompt to enforce strict LLM output formatting.
Hallucination	An instance where a generative AI model produces plausible-sounding but factually incorrect or logically disconnected content.
Prompt Injection	A security vulnerability where untrusted user input manipulates an AI model's intended operational instructions.
Stateless API	An architectural pattern where the server retains no session memory between requests; all necessary context (e.g., JWTs) is provided by the client per request.
A.4.2 Sample Synthetic Test Profile
During testing (Section 6.12), standardized synthetic profiles were utilized to benchmark AI recommendation quality and prompt adherence.
Profile Field	Value
Academic Stream	MCA (Specialization: Cloud Computing)
Current Semester	3
CGPA	8.2
Stated Interests	Backend development, cloud infrastructure, databases
Programming Fundamentals	84 / 100
Web & Cloud Technologies	76 / 100
Data & Analytics	58 / 100
Professional / Soft Skills	65 / 100
A.4.3 Sample AI-Generated Output
The following represents the parsed JSON output generated by the Gemini API when processing the synthetic test profile defined above.
Field	Value
careerPath	Cloud / DevOps Engineer
matchScore	87
skillGaps	Container orchestration (Kubernetes), CI/CD pipeline design, Infrastructure-as-Code (Terraform)
explanation	Your strong systems and infrastructure score, combined with solid programming fundamentals, aligns well with cloud engineering roles. Strengthening hands-on container-orchestration and CI/CD experience would close the gap to a senior-track profile.


REFERENCES
Adeyemi, T., & Bello, O. (2025). Generative AI adoption in African and South Asian EdTech startups: A cost-sensitivity survey. International Journal of Educational Technology, 14(1), 45–62.
Alvarez, M., & Kim, S. (2023). Failure modes in large language model-based recommendation systems. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, 211–220.
Bianchi, F., & Russo, L. (2023). A comparative security audit of Node.js middleware stacks for production APIs. Journal of Web Engineering Security, 8(2), 101–118.
Choudhury, R., Das, P., & Iyer, S. (2025). Demographic bias in LLM-generated career recommendations. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, 7(1), 33–47.
Desai, K., & Trivedi, A. (2023). Self-assessment instruments for programming proficiency: A validation study. Computer Science Education, 33(4), 512–530.
Ferreira, J., Santos, M., & Lima, R. (2024). Benchmarking JSON-schema adherence in commercial LLM APIs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11892.
García, P., & Fernández, L. (2022). JWT versus session-based authentication for distributed REST APIs. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 48(9), 3456–3470.
Google. (2025). Gemini API documentation. Google AI for Developers. https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs
Hassan, F., & Al-Mansoori, Y. (2024). Comparing self-, peer-, and instructor-assessment of soft skills in higher education. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 49(2), 211–229.
Kumar, V., Singh, A., & Reddy, N. (2024). Knowledge-graph-based career recommendation linking skills, courses, and job roles. Expert Systems with Applications, 238, 121823.
Lindqvist, E., & Bergström, H. (2022). Mapping academic competencies to industry skill frameworks: A taxonomy. European Journal of Engineering Education, 47(5), 789–805.
Liu, Y., Wang, X., & Chen, Z. (2024). MongoDB schema design patterns for evolving, semi-structured applications. Proceedings of the International Conference on Database Systems, 145–159.
Mehta, R., & Joshi, S. (2024). Retrieval-augmented generation for grounding LLM responses in domain-specific data. Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Conference, 1102–1114.
Nguyen, T., & Tran, H. (2023). Matrix factorization for career recommendation using skill self-assessments and job postings. Information Systems Research, 34(3), 1023–1041.
Patel, D., Shah, K., & Mehta, P. (2022). Predicting placement likelihood using decision-tree classifiers on historical student data. International Journal of Computer Applications, 184(15), 22–29.
Petrov, I., & Ivanova, S. (2023). Cost and latency analysis of PaaS hosting for small-scale educational web applications. Journal of Cloud Computing, 12(1), 1–18.
Roy, S., & Banerjee, A. (2023). Large language models for resume analysis: A comparative human-evaluation study. Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), 1–12.
Singh, J., & Kaur, P. (2024). Rate-limiting and quota-management strategies for applications wrapping generative AI APIs. IEEE Software, 41(3), 67–75.
Wirawan, B., & Putri, D. (2023). Skill-decay modelling in self-assessment-based competency tracking systems. Journal of Educational Technology Research, 19(4), 301–318.
Zhang, L., Liu, M., & Zhao, Y. (2023). Prompt-engineering strategies for structured JSON output from large language models. Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 4521–4535.

